how do we go from okay i have this
negative emotion it's controlling my
life it's got me in this cycle of i
think about this emotion which triggers
a chemical reaction which trains my body
to feel that way which makes it easier
more likely i will do it again and so
now i'm i'm in this vicious side and
unconscious and it's unconscious right
and you um you said does your thinking
create your environment or does your
environment create your thinking which i
thought was really really interesting so
how do we then go from that like
mechanistically
to begin this visualization process of
something that's empowering it's me in a
different state it's my future self is
it meditation is it
what does that look like if you're not
being defined by a vision of the future
then you're left with the old memories
of the past and you will be predictable
in your life
and if you wake up in the morning and
you're not being defined by a vision in
the future as you see the same people
and you go to the same places and you do
the exact same thing at the exact same
time
it's no longer that your personality is
creating your personal reality now your
personal reality is affecting or
creating your personality your
environment is really controlling how
you think and feel unconsciously
because every person everything every
place every experience has a
neurological network in your brain
every experience that you have with
every person produces an emotion so some
people will use their boss to reaffirm
their addiction to judgment they'll use
their enemy to reaffirm their addiction
to hatred they'll use their friends to
reaffirm their addiction to suffering so
now they need the outer world to feel
something
so
to change then
is to be greater than your environment
to be greater than the conditions in
your world and the environment is that
seductive
so then
why is meditation the tool well
let's sit down let's close our eyes
let's disconnect
from your outer environment so if you're
seeing less things there's less
stimulation going to your brain if
you're playing soft music or you have
ear plugs in less sensory information
coming to your brain so you're
disconnecting from your environment if
you can sit your body down
and tell it to stay like an animal stay
right here i'm going to feed you when
we're done you can get up and check your
emails you can do all your texts but
right now you're going to sit there and
obey me
so then
when you do that properly and you're not
eating anything or smelling anything or
tasting anything you're not up
experiencing and feeling anything
you would have to agree with me that
you're being defined by a thought right
so when the body wants to go back to its
emotional past
and you become aware that your attention
is on that emotion and where you place
your attention is where you place your
energy
you're siphoning your energy out of the
present moment into the past and you
become aware of that
and you settle your body back down in
the present moment because it's saying
well it's 8 o'clock you normally get
upset because you're in traffic around
this time and here you are sitting and
we're used to feeling anger and you're
off schedule oh it's 11 o'clock and
usually check your emails and judge
everybody well the body's looking for
that that predictable chemical state
every time you become aware that you're
doing that and your body is craving
those emotions
and you settle it back down into the
present moment you're telling the body
it's no longer the mind that you're the
mind and now your will
is getting greater than the program and
if you keep doing this over and over
again over and over again over and over
again just like training a stallion
or a dog it's just gonna say i'm going
to sit
and the moment that happens when the
body is no longer the mind when it
finally surrenders
there's a liberation of energy
we go from particle to wave from matter
to energy and we free ourselves from the
chains of those emotions that keep us in
the in the familiar past and we've seen
this
thousands of times in fact we can
actually predict it now on a brain scan
yeah i found this so interesting
um let's go a little bit harder on
metacognition the notion that you don't
have to believe everything you think i
love the way that you talk about that
yeah we have a huge frontal lobe and
it's 40 of our entire brain
and most people
when they have a thought they just think
that that's the truth and i think one of
my greatest
realizations in my own journey was
just because you have a thought doesn't
necessarily mean it's true
so if you think 60 to 70 000 thoughts in
one day and we do and ninety percent of
those thoughts are the same thoughts as
the day before and you believe that your
thoughts have something to do with your
destiny your life's not going to change
very much because the same thought leads
to the same choice the same choice leads
to the same behavior the same behavior
creates the same experience and the same
experience produces the same emotion and
so then
the act of becoming conscious of this
process to to begin to become more aware
of how you think how you act and how you
feel it's called metacognition and so
then
why is that important because the more
conscious
you become of those unconscious states
of mind and body
the less likely you're going to go
unconscious during the day and that
thought is not going to slip by your
awareness unchecked
because you're
it means to know thyself and the word
meditation means to become familiar with
so as you become familiar with the
thoughts the behaviors and the emotions
of the old self you're retiring that old
self as you fire and wire new thoughts
and condition the body into a new
emotional state if you do that enough
times it'll begin to become familiar to
you so
it's so important uh just like a garden
if you're planting a garden you got to
get rid of the weeds
you got to take the plants from the past
year and you got to pull them out the
rocks that sift to the top that are like
our emotional blocks they have to be
removed the soil has to be tenderized
and broken down we have to we have to
make room to plant a new garden so
primarily we learn the most about
ourselves and others when we're
uncomfortable because the moment you
move into that uncomfortable state
normally a program jumps in when that
program jumps in it's because a person
doesn't want to be in the present moment
and engage it consciously
so when you teach people how to do that
with a meditative process
it turns out that when they're in their
life
they're less likely to emotionally react
they're less likely to be so rigid and
believe the thoughts they were thinking
they're more aware of when they go
unconscious back into a habit and that
is what starts the process of change
and so we have to unlearn before we
relearn we have to break the habit of
the old self before we reinvent the new
self we have to prune synaptic
connections and sprout new connections
we have to unfire and unwire and re-fire
and rewire we have to unmemorize
emotions that are stored in the body
then recondition the body to a new mind
into a new motion like deprogram and
reprogram that's the act and it's a
two-step process yeah i like the way
that you call that out as an action
there was another thing that you said
that i thought was really powerful about
how insights themselves are essentially
inert they don't do anything
what what then do we do with an insight
how do we take a breakthrough moment and
make sure that it's not just a
breakthrough moment like i guarantee
people watching right now are having
like 100 aha moments
for sure that was definitely the case
for me as i was researching you and when
you said that i was like and that's the
danger that you have the aha and then
nothing yeah yeah and that's it's a it
is a danger because then people will
will shrink back into mediocracy and
they'll use the insight to excuse them
from taking a leap
they'll say yeah you know i have a
chemical imbalance in my brain you know
my father was
really overbearing he was a
perfectionist that's why i am the way i
am you know people they they come up
with stuff
to to excuse themselves the insight is
actually
giving them permission to stay limited
and it's it's it's an amazing idea
because
they'll say to you
that they really want to get over their
anxiety
but let's okay let's take your
ex-husband let's put him in a
straitjacket let's duct tape him and
shoot him to the moon now what i mean
what are you going to do now you still
have to make those changes and so when
the person's enemy dies or
something shifts in their life
and that person's gone they'll find
another person to hate this is just how
we function as human beings we just
slide another
reason to feel those emotions so
i think i think when people start to
understand this you know i think
knowledge is power
but knowledge about yourself is
self-empowerment so how much of this is
really learning to to just bifurcate the
world into there's negative emotions
that have negative neurochemistry
associated with and you said that in
those states if you're living in a
perpetual state of
stress hormones and things like that
illness is like a step away
and then just the other side of that is
understanding but there's this whole
other side of positive energy which
happiness joy empowerment whatever that
you know neurochemical cocktail is but
that when you're on that side um your
immune system is more likely to function
well like is that
just sort of bringing it down to like a
really base level is that sort of one of
the biggest things
well let's talk about it in terms of
survival or creation
as i said 70 of the time people live in
stress and living in stress is living in
survival now
all organisms in nature can tolerate
short-term stress you know a deer gets
chased
by a pack of coyotes when it outruns the
coyotes it goes back to grazing and the
event is over and the definition of
stress is when your brain and body are
knocked out of balance out of
homeostasis
the stress response is what the body
innately does to return itself back to
order so you're driving down the road
someone cuts you off you jam on the
brakes you may you give them the finger
and then you settle back down and the
event is over and boom now everything's
back back to normal
but what if it's not a predator that's
waiting for you
outside the cave but what if it's your
co-worker
sitting right next to you and all day
long you're turning on those chemicals
because they're pushing all your
emotional buttons
when you turn on the stress response
and you can't turn it off now you're
headed for disease because no organism
in nature can live in emergency mode for
that extended period of time it's a
scientific fact
that the hormones of stress down
regulate genes and create disease
long-term effects
human beings because of the size of the
neocortex we can turn on the stress
response just by thought alone we can
think about our problems and turn on
those chemicals
that means then
our thoughts
could make us sick so if it's possible
that our thoughts could make us sick is
it possible then our thoughts can make
us well the answer is absolutely yes
so then what are the emotions that are
connected to survival let's name them
anger aggression hostility
hatred competition fear anxiety worry
pain suffering guilt shame unworthiness
envy jealousy those are all
created by the hormones of stress and
and psychology calls them normal human
states of consciousness i call those
altered states of consciousness
so then we tend to remember those
traumatic events more because in
survival you better be ready if it
happens again that's and and when
survival gene is switched on you could
have 10 really great things that
happened to you in your day
and you just have one bad thing that
happens and you cannot take your
attention off that bad that that unhappy
thing because the survival gene is
switched on
it's really interesting how does
epigenetics come into play in all this
like what's actually happening you've
talked pretty profoundly about um
proteins and like really at a deep level
how we're signaling to our genetics to
create these kinds of changes what does
that actually look like well
epigenetics epi means above the gene
and
many years ago after the dna helix was
discovered by watson and crick
they said the blueprints of life you
know all diseases are created from genes
it turns out less than five percent more
like one percent of people on the planet
are born with a genetic condition like
type 1 diabetes or tay sachs disease or
sickle cell anemia the other 95 to 99
percent are created by lifestyle and by
choices you can take two identical twins
exact same genome one dies at 51 the
other one dies at 85.
same gene different environment
so
all of a sudden they said we lied
that was wrong it's not genes that
create disease it's the environment that
signals the gene that creates disease
well okay but that's not the whole truth
too because you could have two people
working side by side in the same factory
one gets cancer after being exposed to a
carcinogenic for 25 years both working
for 25 years the other one has no cancer
at all so there must be some internal
order
that would cause one person to not get
it while another one does
so
is it possible then
if the environment signals the gene and
it does and the end product of an
experience in the environment is called
an emotion
can you signal the gene ahead of the
environment by embracing an elevated
emotion
we've done the research on this we
measured
7500 different gene expressions in a
group of people
that came to an advanced event for four
days
and we had them doing a seated
meditation a walking meditation a laying
down meditation a standing meditation
and at the end of four days just four
days
the common eight genes that were up
regulated two genes to suppress cancer
cells and tumor growth
two genes for neurogenesis the growth of
new neurons in response to novel
experiences and learning the gene that
signals stem cells to go to damaged
areas and repair them the gene for
oxidative stress
was upregulated we started seeing all
these genes that are very very healthy
to cause the body to flourish imagine if
people were doing that for three months
we also measured telomeres the little
shoestrings on the end of dna that tell
us our biological age we asked people
to do the work meditation five out of
seven days for 60 days
measure their telomeres that determine
their biological age 60 days later
74 percent of the people lengthen their
telomeres 40 percent significant change
20 percent a very remarkable change that
means that they got a little bit of
their life back if it lengthened by 10
percent they got 10 of their life back
what is up my friend tom bill you here
and i have a big question to ask you how
would you rate your level of personal
discipline on a scale of one to ten if
your answer is anything less than a ten
i've got something cool for you and let
me tell you right now discipline by its
very nature means compelling yourself to
do difficult things that are stressful
boring which is what kills most people
or possibly scary or even painful now
here is the thing achieving huge goals
and stretching to reach your potential
requires you to do those challenging
stressful things and to stick with them
even when it gets boring and it will get
boring building your levels of personal
discipline is not easy but let me tell
you it pays off in fact i will tell you
you're never going to achieve anything
meaningful unless you develop discipline
right i've just released a class from
impact theory university called how to
build ironclad discipline that teaches
you the process of building yourself up
in this area so that you can push
yourself to do the hard things that
greatness is going to require of you
right click the link on the screen
register for this class right now and
let's get to work i will see you inside
this workshop from impact theory
university until then my friends be
legendary peace out
so so billy buckner who just passed away
recently was an incredible eight-time
gold globe a great baseball player for
the boston red sox
well he made a mistake in sports that
would be one of the biggest sport
bloopers in history and in 1986 he let
the game-winning run score on a ground
ball through his legs that ultimately
would give the mets the world series
now
i was just watching an espn e60 jeremy
shop story and i saw an interview that
was done in 1990 that resurfaced in 1995
where buckner was interviewed 12 days
before the world series and he said you
know the dreams are to win
you know to win the world series and the
nightmare would be for me to let the
game-winning run score on a ground ball
through my legs
you know and then ultimately that's
exactly what would happen now by saying
that out loud what did he do he didn't
make it happen but he increased the
probability
and this is what i want people to
understand your internal thoughts are
all over the place
i want to push on that do you think that
he makes it more likely because it's
going to subtly influence his behavior
or because you're talking to some
magical deity that then says well you
said it and so i'm gonna make it happen
i think that what he did is a
subconscious plant
by verbalizing it and knowing that it's
ten times more powerful he's planting it
in his subconscious he's not he doesn't
want it to happen but it becomes
something that's ultimately on his mind
and he gave it more power by verbalizing
it and then wasn't there somebody that
said i i worry that i'm going to
retire and die at 40 of a heart attack
right so so pistol pete marovich a
basketball player i'll give you two
other examples but but he was
interviewed at 26 years old and he said
you know i don't want to play 10 years
of pro basketball and die at the age of
40 of a heart attack
well he played 10 years of pro
basketball and in pasadena california
died of a heart attack at 40. there's
another great story that i saw
from a magazine called success unlimited
in 1973 a guy is hired to fix a
refrigerated boxcar in back of a train
he goes into the train he panics gets
himself locked inside the boxcar so now
he's pounding on the door there's
nothing to do he starts to panic and
thinks he's going to freeze to death he
finds a pen he starts writing down tom
what's going through his mind and he
writes down i'm becoming colder as
people one of the things we do to
ourselves is observe and report i'm not
playing well i'm having a bad day we're
having a bad quarter my marriage isn't
going well we observant report still
colder now he writes nothing to do but
wait half asleep i could hardly write
finally
he says these might be my last words and
i'll show you the article they open up
the boxcar many hours later and they
find him and he's dead
but the temperature inside the box car
was 56 degrees that's so crazy the
freezing apparatus was broken there was
plenty of air in the boxcar there was no
physical reason for his death the best
they could say is somehow he talked
himself into dying and as you know the
book covers the psychogenic death in and
around the korean war
when the korean war one third of all
american pows died and they said that
one of the things that was done in the
pow camps was the negativity they
manufactured articles about the united
states being bombed they withheld all
positivity they didn't give them any
mail believe it or not there are like
regulations for pow camps throughout the
world
and ultimately they filled up these
healthy american soldiers with all this
doubt a a priest would end up calling it
give up itis
and healthy american soldiers over a
period of days would walk over to a
corner sit down and die of broken hearts
so negativity is the most powerful thing
we're combating look at our politics
today a positive message versus a
negative message it's no no no chance
have you ever read men's search for
meaning i haven't read that guys you're
going to love it so man's search for
meaning victor frankl in a conference oh
yes yes yes yes yes it's actually in
multiple if i remember right he was in
five different concentration camps yes
and ultimately um he says that he you
could tell within 72 hours when someone
was gonna die because they would give up
yep and he said once they gave up then
it was a 72-hour clock they no longer
knew why they were fighting and and they
would just die
and he was like but the people that kept
a mental image of what they were
suffering for like what it was they were
gonna do once they got out for their
family for whatever
he said that they would push through and
it just i mean look there's obviously a
million and one reasons to die in a
concentration camp but the fact that
even in the concentration camp they
could go i'm 72 hours we can peg it
right because we've seen that person
give up right like that's just crazy to
me
well and and i just think
when when i think about
being seven years old in the tacoma golf
and country club and walking off the
golf course and my dad you know
everybody call mr positive and this and
that but in fairness to my dad when he
was raised and he was teaching the only
thing was positive and negative
so if you weren't negative you had to be
positive
but that just never made sense to me and
if we could just learn how to not be
negative how to not externalize negative
then ultimately that would help them
more than ever trying to be told to be
positive i love what you say just shut
your mouth
i thought that was you've said it even
more aggressively more aggressively i i
think it's super [__] powerful right
what do you mean by that why is that so
critical well if just if you follow the
data and you say stupid [__] out loud
ultimately you're predicting and
perpetuating exactly what you don't want
to have happen and who's always in
control of what tom biliu says you're
always in control of what you say people
say yeah but i can't the thinking
everybody's [__] up in the thoughts
i've been with people the night before
super bowl the night before national
championships eight different times
where the doubt's there but we're not
externalizing it and then i'll have
people say well what do you want me to
lie i'm not telling you to lie
i'm telling you that if you look at the
information and you say
i don't want to be here today i hate
this job god dang they or or you look at
muhammad sanew they're down they're up
28 3 in the super bowl playing against
tom brady and he looks at his friend and
says hey man they still got tom brady on
their side there is no lead that's safe
well [__] why are you saying that you
know and you're almost predicting that
that's what's going to happen now
ultimately
not saying stupid things out loud is you
have to create an alternative
so i started thinking about a car
if a car's going backwards it can't
automatically go forward
so it has to to shift into neutral and
then it stops then at that point you can
either go forward by changing your
behavior or you can go backwards by
doing the same stupid [__] you were just
doing neutral is truth-based thinking
what's the truth
okay in 2010 you're running a a data
loss company right you've been doing it
for eight years you graduated from ufc
film you're that's not what you want to
do you're 60 pounds overweight you lose
your weight you find two buddies and you
say hey man uh we're gonna go into my
kitchen we're gonna find a way to create
a product that's going to be different
than anything anybody knows well i'm
educated in this because i partnered
with gatorade sports science institute
at img and i you know and you created a
value proposition that ultimately
you know based upon you didn't let your
past predict your future
you used your past was real but i want
to be do something different so you
behave this is this is a really
interesting part of what you say that
the past isn't predictive correct so
talk to me more about that because i
would say most people would say that the
past is definitely predictive right
which is great but they'd be wrong
right so they would be wrong and the
simple fact of the matter is the past is
real
okay
so
the only thing that makes it predictive
is if my behavior stays the same
so i'll give you a great story
so we both grew up in tacoma
and there used to be a thing called
toastmasters i don't know if you
remember toastmasters but toastmasters
was a local regional and a national
speaking group for anybody that wanted
to get better at speaking
well my dad had gone to a toastmasters
early on and heard one of the most
successful magazine entrepreneurs in the
world speak he comes back and tells me i
just had a chance to hear one of the
most successful magazine entrepreneurs
in the world
speak and he said when are you taking
your sat i said i'm taking it next year
he said well this guy was failing out of
high school he was struggling he was
raised by a single mom in the midwest
but he promised his mother he would take
a test called the s.a.t
so he takes the sat in may's junior year
doesn't expect anything get to score
back in june now the s.a.t which i don't
know how many your population know but
it's it's a standardized test with the
math part and a verbal part both are
scored out of 800 points well this guy
takes it he's bombing he's failing out
of school he doesn't expect anything as
he's telling the story of toastmasters
well he gets a 1480 out of 1600.
so he's stunned right that would be for
the smart people that listened to your
problem yeah right cognitive dissonance
i got a 900 on my sats just to give
people a friend right and i got a 10 90
and i got a 10 10. right i was just hey
four digits it was a miracle right and
and but it's a hard test and it you know
it's a variety of different things so he
gets the score and his mother doing what
any mother would do knowing her kid says
did you cheat right she knows her son
and he said i swear to god i tried to
cheat but the way the numbers were and
the scantrons and the bubbles you
couldn't cheat so she says you mean to
tell me you really got that score he
said yeah i got the score so he's
stunned tom so as my dad telling me the
story i'm like okay so he says all right
so what he decides is because he
realizes he's smart and he's going into
his senior year he says i'm going to go
to class
now he starts to go to class he doesn't
hang out with who he did when he didn't
go to class
all right teacher see him in class and
they said hey maybe franklin pierce
maybe we missed the boat on this kid so
they start to treat him differently well
as the guy would tell the story he
graduates goes to a community college
goes on to wichita state goes under the
ivy league and becomes this massively
successful magazine entrepreneur so i
said okay well the guy was always smart
he just needed a standardized test to
unlock it my dad said no that's not the
story this is what i want you to
understand
he said 12 years after all this guy's
success he gets a letter in the mail
from princeton new jersey doesn't think
anything about it the next day his wife
says you're going to open it he opens it
true story turns out the s.a.t board
will periodically review their test
taking procedures and the policies the
year he took the test he was one of 13
people
sent the wrong s.a.t score
his actual score was a 740 out of 1600.
and he said people think my whole life
changed when i got to 1480. but what
happened my whole life changed when i
started acting like a 1480 and what does
a 1480 do he goes to class
well this is one of the first stories i
would share when i had my opportunity at
alabama or florida state or georgia so a
your language is powerful but number two
your behavior is way ahead of your
success
and so many people let their feelings
dictate what they do as opposed to throw
your behavior out there russell wilson's
510 he shouldn't be playing pro football
but he behaves like the best quarterback
in the country and he's done that since
before he was at that level and then his
feelings and emotions and his skill
caught up to that behavior i think the
lesson my dad was trying to teach me
ultimately was in addition to my
language what i do
not how i feel about my past is going to
determine who i am in the future and
that's what i think neutral thinking is
i think neutral thinking isn't just
thinking i think it's behavior and i
think it's language and so your behavior
is what's going to change you
but
you also have to start by asking
yourself what do i want and why do i
want it why don't i have it you know
what am i willing to do to get it and i
do think in terms of listening to to one
of your earlier podcasts i do think
there's value in writing things down
but in a really simple way
i've learned probably the most things
through the best athletes in the world
and michael johnson who had the gold
shoes
i'll never forget drew brees were
training for the nfl combine in 2001.
there's 18 guys
michael just finished winning his fourth
gold medal
and he comes in and he's just
just a badass dude fastest man alive
fastest man alive at that point um he
had just run uh the 43-18
um you know and then when he ran the
19-3 it was uh 26 miles per hour the
fastest
the fastest 50 to 150 he ran 9-1 flat
so all these athletes were in awe of
michael
and i think drew at the time says hey
man do you set goals
he said yeah he said where did you learn
so what do you mean what i learned so
where where'd you learn like do you
learn in college i didn't learn in
college
you said did you learn like smart goals
like what the [__] are smart goals you
know and smart goals are specific
measurable attainable realistic and with
the time frame michael said when i would
go into safeway
i recognized that if i walked into
safeway and i wrote eight things down i
would walk into safeway and i'd walk out
a safeway in five minutes
if i walked into safeway and had nothing
written down i would be in there for 20
minutes and i'd find myself on aisle 8
and i'd be anxious and i'd be nervous
and i'd be why am i looking at the wind
weathens and the ho-ho's when i know i
don't need any of those things and he
said so because i wrote it down in
safeway and it worked i figured why
would i be any different about my
athletic career
and i think that that's the level that
we need to educate people i hope it
takes what it takes
basically
is an introduction to self-help
that
when i look at mindfulness being
the brand and and uh headspace being a
billion-dollar evaluation and i sit
there and think
at you know 44 years old and growing up
in this my whole life the only time i
can meditate is at the end of church
it's such a challenging skill and is it
important absolutely it's important do
our affirmations important absolutely
they're important are changing from the
inside out important yes but they're not
the starting points
don't say stupid [__] out loud be
mindful of what you consume if i watch
three minutes of news it increases my
probability by 27
i'm going to say i had a shitty day
right when i was going through and you
know when i was going through a
divorce i had a lawsuit i had some
health challenges all these different
types of things if i'm listening to jake
owen or sam hunt i love new country but
new country makes me just want to go run
and jump off a cliff
you know it makes me think i'm never
going to meet another girl ever again in
my life which i hope is not true you
know and and so what are the things that
are in our control what we watch when we
get home
what we listen to when we're in our car
who we talk to when we get on our cell
phone and what we say out loud always as
we speak and i think that those are the
powerful things and ultimately our
behavior is what's going to define our
success
yeah i love that man it really does all
come down to behavior and that all of
this boils down to what you do on a
day-to-day basis which brings me to a
concept that you got from your dad about
hope and how powerful that is
how can people use hope why does it
matter how does that fit into this
equation
yeah i i think my dad's belief was when
you become helpless you become hopeless
and when i feel like i can control my
behavior when i feel like i'm in
control of even if i'm going through
cancer
even if i'm going through a difficult
challenge even if i'm going through a
reorgan a business
you know if i still feel like okay this
is not optimal but there's something i
can do then i'm helpful to myself and
when i'm helpful i'm hopeful and when
i'm helpless i'm hopeless
so my dad's belief always was to make
hope a habit
and and that hope was the most powerful
medicine that we all have and then i
think we have to believe
that we can influence our future
you know we've got to believe i believe
that no matter what i'm facing i can
influence my future that just because my
first marriage didn't work that doesn't
mean my second marriage won't but it's
incumbent upon me to be better
right and that's where
if i'm spending time well she didn't do
this she didn't do there's nothing i can
do about that
right but that's true and that's where
you're talking about well the past feels
predictive
right well i thought you know hey what
what are you gonna do to be different
going forward but
so many people think the self-help
industry is about things you do
i think one of the things that makes
athletes so incredible is what they're
willing not to do
what they're willing not to say
what they're willing not to eat
what they're what they're willing not to
consume what they're willing not to
watch
that's what makes think about it's
january 2020 what are five things you
cannot do right now that will instantly
make your life better talk to me about
the illusion of choice yeah i think
that's so powerful
you know it was it was really
fascinating so um
i was um you know obviously i've worked
in the sports world for a long time and
i was my first nba team was the memphis
grizzlies
and
guys love college football and vince
carter
who's 42 now same age as tom brady and
still playing in the nba plays for
atlanta vince was about
37 at the time
and we had just had three players
arrested at one of the programs i was
headed to in one night like we hit our
quota for her like for a night and
vince and i were talking he loved
college football and he said he said
how many of those guys trev want to play
in the nba or in the nfl and i said
probably seven out of ten and he said
and isn't it crazy they think they can
do whatever they want and still make it
to that level
and i said what do you mean he said he
said well i'm 37 i'm still playing in
the nba you think i can do whatever i
want i said what do you mean yeah i do
think you can he said no my choices are
finite i said what do you mean like
choice is an illusion he said choice is
absolutely an illusion there's a set of
behaviors that i do that allow me to
play at 37. i can't slam dunk the ball
now yes i can still slam dunk but if i
slam dunk it takes its toll on my knees
and i can't get back and play defense
fast enough so when i get down i lay the
ball up more times than not i don't eat
fast food after games i lift weight
every day of games and i said so choice
is an illusion he said yeah
and i ended up going at that point he
was heading over to the university of
alabama
and we sort of coined the idea of the
illusion of choice there are no choices
when you decide when you decided you
wanted to build you didn't decide you
wanted to build a billion-dollar empire
but you decided you wanted to make a
different type of
uh
nutritional bar correct
did you start with the bar yeah
and so there was there was either going
to be a way that you did it or there was
going to be other way and there was
going to be a way that tasted just like
muscle milk or there was going to be a
way that was going to be different
and you either did it or you didn't
correct yeah and you were either going
to commit the time and i'm just using
you as an example but if i want to have
a good relationship i saw a statistic
that said the average married couple
talks 27 minutes a week
i was talking some of my buddies about
that and they're like that much what did
i find all the time
but
that's obviously not a good statistic
well are you born
with the gift to make time for people no
it's a behavior
so to me the illusion of choice is
thinking you can have a good marriage
and talk 27 minutes a week so you have
to
make time
in order to talk and maybe you're on the
road you travel a lot turning your tv
off when you're on the road doing simple
better turning the tv off turning the
light off and just engaging in a
conversation
you know if you're engaging with your
kids there's a way to do it and there's
a way not to do it thinking you have an
infinite amount of choices
is idiotic
and this generation right now generation
z and generation y both think they can
do whatever the [__] they want to do
and and still achieve things
you can achieve whatever you want to do
in many cases if you're willing to get
behind the behaviors that drive that
success but it won't be anything
pete carroll for the seahawks he'll let
you go to bed at five in the morning if
you want as long as you can perform to a
9.5 standard when you get there
okay well what you're going to figure
out is you can't go to bed at five in
the morning
okay so
you're gonna have to adapt your behavior
to get in alignment with winning
behaviors so the illusion of choice is
this fact that there are not an infinite
amount of choices there may be options
yeah i can get
pasta instead of a cheeseburger
but even if i want to maintain a diet or
maintain optimal health then i have to
limit how much calorie intake
what type of fluids when i when i first
lost weight i i didn't understand that
gatorade had 800 calories in it you know
when you drink those four gatorades even
though all you're eating is lunchables
you're actually
like driving all these calories and it's
just
am i doing simple better today we're
going to be talking about limiting
beliefs how to get out from under them
how to move forward if you've struggled
with something in the past it is
critically important to get your belief
structure right to make sure that you
don't believe things consciously or
subconsciously that are going to
throttle your actions the end of the day
the only thing that matters are your
behaviors but your behaviors are driven
entirely by your beliefs get your
beliefs right and everything else will
line up
all right
first question
what should i do to identify
the self-limiting beliefs that are
holding me back
okay this is one of those things that
instead of trying to get in and identify
all the different self-limiting beliefs
that you have what i would start doing
is focusing on building a growth mindset
now
one read carol dweck's book called
mindset it is absolutely the right place
to start
at the end of that book you will have
learned a very simple truth it is what i
call the only belief that matters which
is that if i put time and energy into
getting better at something i will
actually get better that is a belief
that will align your behaviors because
at the end of the day
instead of like i said going through and
finding all the self-limiting beliefs
just start layering on these empowering
beliefs so one you can get better at
anything at any time so putting time and
energy into getting better at something
will reward you with actual skill set
and skill set has utility
now if you believe that and you think of
yourself as the learner as you encounter
a limiting belief i can never do that
i'm not a good dancer i can't sing
whatever the thing is you tell yourself
then it just becomes a question of well
if i know that i can get better at
anything the question is do i want to
put time into getting better at this
thing and if i don't want to spend time
getting better at this thing then don't
bs myself don't say i'm not oh i'm just
not good at that just say i don't care
enough about that thing to want to put
in the energy to try and get better now
another thing that can be very
freeing so for instance i really wish i
could sing i also really wish i could
draw those are two things that i really
want but the truth is
when i say that i really want them
what i mean is that i really wish they
came easily to me and once i finally was
honest with myself that i wanted to get
what i'll call disproportionate returns
that
when lisa spends time getting better at
drawing she gets like
10x return on her time it's insane she's
a world-class artist if i put the same
amount of time into getting better at
drawing i might get a 0.6 return of my
time so i'm going to get better but it's
like that same unit of energy could be
used on many other things and i would
get a much better return than i would
focus on drawing same with singing
there's no doubt i could get a hundred
times better at either of them
but
at what cost it would take so much time
and energy so be very thoughtful that
you're layering on these empowering
beliefs and then being honest about how
you want to spend your time
once you get that balance right and you
realize you can do anything you want but
you can't do everything you want and
that things have to be put in priority
order then it becomes very clarifying
that it's not even necessarily that you
have a limiting belief it's that you're
being honest with yourself about what
you do and don't want to pursue so the
key is to hold tight to that only belief
that matters that you can
get good at anything
now once you have it just ask yourself
how badly do i want that thing
next
can you explain what initiatives i could
take that will help me create the same
discipline that you have
so that i might have more confidence in
what i can accomplish
okay so first of all you've got to
instill in your mind that the average
human
is capable of unbelievable
improvement
that's that's the thing that's my
superpower i don't think i'm special i
just realized in looking at the science
that humans actually are capable of this
incredible amount of change it is the
strategy that our species took to be
able to
pass knowledge on through culture rather
than having to have everything be
instincts and in having that layer where
we can drink in the culture and read
books and learn from other people and
you know even now we're all learning
from things that people thought
thousands of years ago and wrote down
like it's insane it travels through to
you and all of that wisdom stored in
culture so that as your parents are
teaching you things they're actually
encapsulating a ton of the wisdom that
is endured whether it's endured from
religion or books or whatever like
you're
bathed in a culture that is giving you
all of this incredible information and
so recognizing how powerful and potent
that is is incredibly
meaningful but you have to understand
that you have to allow yourself to
believe
that you can learn from that culture in
the same way that everybody else can and
that's what you're designed to do now
for me that completely
gave me the confidence and i put
confidence in air quotes because not
like i believe something specific about
myself i just believed that the human
animal is capable of this extraordinary
change and so now i just needed to point
myself in that direction now once this
is the key
once i realized that i could get better
at anything
it dawned on me that how i spend my time
is a spiritual consideration
and i didn't want to die with potential
that i failed to turn into skill set
that to me that speaks to me
how much of my potential can i actually
turn into skill set and get good at this
stuff and push and grow and improve like
that to me is just this incredibly
intoxicating loop
so
for me the discipline the confidence all
of that comes from recognizing human the
human animal nothing special about me
the human animal is capable of
extraordinary change i'm going to have
to put time and energy into doing it but
i'm capable of getting this change
therefore
i can do anything i set my mind to
it really matters what i choose to spend
my time on therefore i want to put
structure and discipline in my life so
that i can move forward on things that
excite me that matter to me because i
really can't have this big crazy dream
that i'm thinking of so my discipline is
really born of my desire to have that
thing coupled with my belief that i can
actually get there
desire
and belief
get those two things right and the
discipline will take care of itself
right
what steps did you take as you navigated
challenging your belief systems daily
especially in the beginning
when you didn't have enough momentum to
internalize the new and improved belief
okay again a lot of this goes back to
the big breakthrough for me was brain
science and i'm laying on the floor of
my unfurnished apartment
i'm in a dark place in my life i'm not
happy i don't know how to make my dreams
come true
i'm very worried that i'm not
enough that i'm not smart enough i'm not
capable enough this is in my early 20s
and
i don't remember i think it was
something that started in college but i
don't remember exactly what made me
decide that i was going to read about
the brain but i did i decided i was
going to read about the brain and in
reading about the brain i started coming
across this idea of brain plasticity
and
this is in the late 90s early 2000s
it's being hotly debated amongst the
smartest people on the planet
as to whether or not it's real
and i decided one day you know what
maybe it's not but i'm going to act as
if it's real
and in acting as if it's real i ended up
finding out that it actually is real
because i was getting so much better at
things i was like whoa this is
incredible and so what i was doing was
learning this information on the key
insight that i was going to act as if i
could get better at something right the
thing i called the only belief that
matters i was going to act as if that
were true
by doing that i saw that it really was
true and now the belief took care of
itself because i saw it empirically in
the data
and that is the like the big thing for
me that i didn't need to believe i was
special i
just
saw that
this process works and so
now my beliefs began to shift not around
like magical thinking they were shifting
around what i was actually seeing and
what i was reading about in the
literature and that to me is it man i
don't know what else to tell people it's
like we are
so capable
of
improving our skill set
and by improving our skill set we are we
can fundamentally alter
our ability to change the world around
us and as you realize whoa
building these skills lets me actually
change the world around me now all of a
sudden it's
just sort of one belief after another
begins to implant itself in your mind
based on what you're able to do and then
as you hit a roadblock and you stumble
and you fall that's sort of that next
thing how do you deal with failure and
all of that
but as you work through this stuff i
ended up compiling
25 beliefs which you can actually
download for free just type
impact theory belief system
and you will see the 25 things that i
onboarded into my mind in order to have
the kind of success that i have now and
what i was trying to onboard is really
just the principles of a growth mindset
and the things that you need to do and
believe in order to constantly be moving
towards your goals
it's really rudimentary it isn't me
making things up it is simply me looking
at the nature of the way the human mind
works in concert with all these other
people and the society that we've
created for ourselves and if you act in
the following ways if you believe the
following things if you create the
following rules then you will move
forward it just is
the physics of the human experience
so
you can shortcut it by going and reading
the 25 beliefs
or you can just start with that same
core first principle of
humans can improve at anything they put
the time and energy into improving in
and then
then it's just like you see it play out
in your life also you could go to the
gym
the gym in fact this is one of the
things that i did by changing your body
you will realize oh my god if i'm
disciplined consistent and i learn about
this stuff i can radically transform my
body once you see that you can transform
your body you really start to believe
that you can transform anything the body
is an extraordinary
way to get to the mind
so i would leverage that as well
my self-limiting beliefs stem from
childhood trauma what suggestions do you
have that might help me overcome them
okay so this unfortunately is something
that comes up a lot and one i just want
you to know trust me when i say you were
not alone so many people are struggling
with childhood trauma and
one i want to say that
having a professional therapist work
with you on this is probably going to be
the right answer without knowing exactly
what it is you're struggling with
becomes very hard to help somebody deal
with it but i can tell you that a lot of
times what ends up happening is people
end up feeling that their self-worth is
diminished and they don't believe that
they're worth
getting rid of the limiting beliefs and
they think that they are damaged or
um compromised in some way and so one
recognizing that that just is not true
and that you absolutely are worth it and
that the only thing that makes sense is
to adopt one of the beliefs that really
changed my life which is that the only
thing that makes sense
is to only do and believe that which
moves you towards your goals so even if
it were true
that you are worth less
it doesn't help you get towards your
goal to believe that and if we're only
going to do that which moves us towards
our goals then immediately when we begin
thinking that we're worth less we don't
have to convince ourselves that it isn't
true we only need to realize it doesn't
move us towards our goals and since we
only do that which moves us towards our
goals we're going to pattern interrupt
immediately the second we start playing
that loop because we've got to break the
habit of thinking that about ourselves
so we're going to pattern interrupt that
we don't allow ourselves to think that
anymore it's done it's just not an
effective strategy
and that was a big deal for me because
the thing that i was struggling with was
i'm not smart enough to pull this off
and
by believing that then i didn't try and
as long as i didn't try i was never
going to fail which of course was the
thing i was trying to protect myself
from but i was also never going to
succeed
and so finally what i had to realize was
because my behaviors were being dictated
by my beliefs i could not allow myself
to believe something even if i was
convinced it was true
i couldn't allow myself to believe it
because it would stop me from taking the
behaviors that would lead me
to learning growing getting better and
moving forward and so
you
it's not that easy childhood trauma is
wicked it is so pernicious it gets
inside your mind and it won't let go and
depending on how early in childhood
there is a lot of brain development
around that trauma but i'm just saying
one of the things that we're going to
have to do outside of therapy is begin
to pattern interrupt that to not allow
yourself to repeat those negative
stories about yourself
and
to only do and believe that which moves
you towards your goals so if loving
yourself is going to move you towards
your goals then we're going to do it
even if you don't think that you're
worth it if pushing to grow and get
better is going to move you towards your
goals then we're going to do it even if
it doesn't feel like you deserve it
you have to let go of that in order to
get to your goals and now as long as
your goal is exciting and honorable why
would you ever want to do something to
hold you back if you're doing something
to elevate yourself and other people why
would you want to stop yourself from
doing that even if you deserve to be
punished or whatever it is that you
think about yourself because of what
happened in the past
it doesn't make sense
free yourself from that
allow yourself to contribute to yourself
and others contribute as big and
aggressively as you want as you possibly
can
and by continuing to believe
that you're not worth it you won't be
able to do that you won't be able to
turn your potential into skill set you
won't be able to get into that passion
loop where you're able to learn
something and gain mastery and add value
to other people's lives and get that
positive feedback from them you're so
busy living in the past that you forget
that there's an entire future waiting
for you
but you have to let go of the past
before you can move forward now i don't
want any of that to sound trite again i
understand how difficult this is and i
highly encourage you to get professional
help
there is nothing wrong with that in fact
it's amazing it's beautiful that you
would think enough of yourself to go and
put the time and the energy into getting
better and you can get better but you're
going to have to put in the work
all right
when you were making your transition
into being successful how did you combat
the frustration of not being where you
wanted to be
i'm never where i want to be so i'm not
where i want to be now i'm not where i
wanted to be when um you know people
would have looked at it and said oh my
god this is like the height of success
it was
one i'm very careful to make sure that
i'm only invested in the process but
because i'm trying to get somewhere that
intentionally i'm throwing way beyond
where i'm at i'm always thinking about
what it's going to take to get to that
next level i'm never where i
quote-unquote want to be but i don't
trick myself into tying my value to
achieving it so i'm having fun i'm
enjoying the ride i'm in it for the
process i'm in it for the learning and i
make sure that i'm hand crafting my life
to
optimize for joy and fulfillment
and so knowing that i cannot guarantee
the success i cannot guarantee ever that
anyone is ever going to be successful
but i can
guarantee that you're going to struggle
guarantee
100 nobody avoids it that's it
everybody that ever tries to do anything
and even most of the people that don't
try to do anything are going to struggle
profoundly
with
moving forward
it's just
hard like that
and so if you know that the struggle is
guaranteed then
you can't allow yourself to waste time
to be tormented by the fact that you're
not where you want to be
make sure you're having fun in the
struggle
figuring out how to struggle well that's
the answer
when i was coming up the question i was
told to ask myself was
if you knew you couldn't fail what would
you do
and what i realized is since failure is
the most obvious answer
that's probably not the right question
to ask
the right question to ask is what would
i do and love every day
even if i were failing
now failure is never going to be as fun
as winning i know that but
if you can do something that you believe
in enough and that the act of trying to
get good at it is fun in and of itself
now you're on the right path
that's where you want to focus put your
time and energy into making sure
that
you love
the process
don't worry about the outcome worry
about the process getting better and
loving that everything else will take
care of itself i am really freaked out
to my core like how much of who we are
as an adult is an echo of things that
happened to us when we were a kid and
look i get it like neurologically and
i'd love to hear you taking this i i
have a feeling you're a lot more
educated on it than i am but like the
the the way that our neurology works
such that we are we are so much of a
sponge in the early days and it's a
great strategy right from a species
standpoint you've got a horse sort of
comes pre-wired with everything a human
gets a drink in culture to be shaped by
its environment but when that
environment is dysfunctional then you
get this dysfunctional adult i've heard
very credible psychologists say there
are certain things if you don't get
locked in by the age of four like good
luck unwinding that
and that that really scares me and i'd
love to know like what that process is
of beginning to change that story so
this is where sort of the central
questions of our lives overlap mine is
how do you stop someone's zip code from
being the biggest determinant of their
future success which has so much to do
with how they were raised
yeah and and this is key you know as you
mentioned the the stories that we tell
ourselves these stories are actually
functional at a very core level so
you know what do you mean by functional
well what i mean is that you know
sometimes people talk about only think
positive thoughts so only have positive
emotions okay and and actually we have
around 16 000 spoken thoughts every
single day we have many many emotional
experiences and we have many stories and
there is nothing inherently good or bad
about
any thought you know there's nothing
inherently good or bad about any emotion
these
this is basically your body doing its
job which is that your emotions evolved
to help you to
ward off danger to judge to criticize to
understand to pick apart
so when you have these difficult
thoughts emotions and stories that's
often your body your psychology doing
its job which is basically trying to
help you to be
a coherent being in the world and i'll
give you an example of what i mean by
this you know when i wake up in the
morning and i hear my baby cry
my story which is that is my child that
is crying that needs me
is what helps me to tune in that sound
relative to the washing machine that's
going on in the background
so as human beings what we do is we take
in all these stimuli we take in all this
stuff that's going on in the environment
and we make sense of it
and
making sense of these stories
even if they make sense in a way that
doesn't serve us is sense making so we
all do this
what starts to happen is that
we could have grown up with a story that
might be i'm unlovable i was always told
i'm not good enough and i'm unlovable
but then you know you reach 30 or 35 or
whatever it is and you start recognizing
that that story is stopping you from
being intimate is stopping you from
actually
moving in the direction of your values
which is
that you want to feel close and
collaborative and connected
and so it's
it's not that there's anything
inherently good or bad about any story
any thought or any emotion that we have
the more important question to ask
ourselves is
is the story that i have right now
serving me
can you define serving me that that's i
think something that will help people
yeah yeah is it bringing me closer to
being the person
the leader the loved one that i most
want to be
so for instance if i have a story that
says
um i'm unlovable the example that i gave
earlier
and that's actually now stopping you
from connecting with others and it might
even be impacting on your leadership
because
you are unable to give effective
feedback in a way that feels connected
or you
are really struggling with your team but
you are unable to disclose gee we we're
having a tough time together and you
feel very distant that can get in the
way
and so what's more helpful is to
recognize that our thoughts our emotions
and our stories aren't good or bad they
just are
but sometimes what we do is we hook into
them
and we start letting them drive us
and so what happens is it starts driving
the you know that's the bus and the bus
is being driven by the story as opposed
to recognizing that we are more than our
story there's so much more that we can
bring to our lives and to any difficulty
that we're facing
but when we get stuck or in emotional
agility terms the language that i use is
hooked when we get hooked by a thought
and emotional story
what it does is it often moves us away
from our values and so emotional agility
is the opposite it's the process
by which we become healthy with
ourselves
and healthy with these things inside of
us
so that we can bring other parts of
ourselves to the surface
so when i think about
the things you're talking about and the
process of rebuilding if you've had a
negative story it's not serving you
anymore um and you talk so profoundly
about values i think okay well one i
don't know that a lot of people define
who they want to be like what type of
leader they want to be
i don't know that people know what their
values are um yeah how can people so if
if the rebuilding process is partly um
recognizing okay your emotions can serve
you they're a signal right i've always
said that um if if the subconscious can
process data faster and faster as they
say
then the odds are that emotions are
essentially the subconscious
communicating in a way that's far more
um it's faster it's far more visceral
than if it were just trying to kick up
words into my conscious mind and so
my job is to identify okay what is that
emotion why do i feel that emotion
and then translate it to things i know
about myself so
how do you advise people if if you think
what i'm saying makes sense how do you
advise people to
solidify that identity of who they want
to be identify what their values are so
they can know ah this feeling is out of
alignment with that like what does that
process look like
so okay so the first thing is recognize
that we live in a culture
that tells us that some emotions are bad
and what this can often mean is that we
then
are in an internal struggle with our
difficult emotions because i feel sad
and i shouldn't feel sad you know often
what i talk about in my work is that we
have these type one emotions the type
one emotion is
i'm frustrated i'm angry i'm anxious i'm
fearful i'm grieving okay that's a type
one emotion a type two emotion is the
emotion that you have about the emotion
oh
i'm anxious but i shouldn't be anxious
or you know i should be grateful about
this that's going on even though i'm not
enjoying it because many people would
want to be in my position and so what we
start doing is we start having this
internal struggle with ourselves
so
how do we start
cleaning that out how do we start really
centering on
what are my emotions telling me and how
can they serve me
the first thing that i would say is that
when you feel something
i often talk about this idea that you
know in my work i have often have people
saying to me things like you know i just
wish the stress would go away or i don't
want to feel angry i don't want to feel
disappointed
and i said to them you know i get it but
you know these kind of goals are dead
people's goals
only dead people never get stressed
never feel the disappointment that comes
with failure
never have their hearts broken you know
discomfort is the price of admission to
a meaningful life
you don't get to
raise a family leave the world a better
place or have a meaningful career
without stress and discomfort so the
first thing that i would say is
when you feel a difficult emotion
gentle acceptance
gentle acceptance what do i mean by that
i don't mean passive resignation i don't
mean like
oh you know i feel bad this is helpless
there's no point in me even trying what
is gentle acceptance gentle acceptance
is the equivalent of
you go outside and it's raining
and you say
gee it's raining
okay
it's gee it's raining
not gentle acceptance is
due it's raining and why does it always
rain when i want to go outside and i
wish this rain okay so the first part of
being with our emotions is actually
gentle acceptance and this is not
something we often talk about in
a business-related context because
really what i'm talking about is
self-compassion
self-compassion is often thought of as
being weak or lazy you're deluding
yourself you're lying to yourself but
it's not it's the self-soothing that you
were talking about earlier
it's that ability to
feel something
and instead of punishing yourself for
that feeling
instead being able to say
this is what i'm feeling like this is
tough you know i've had this experience
and it's tough
and when you do that you create
a space for yourself
in which you are connected and you kind
of love yourself
and it's in that space that you then
able to take more risks and try out new
things because you know that if
something goes wrong you'll be there for
you
so that's the first thing the second
thing that i would say is
once you've done gentle acceptance
understand that your emotions contain
signposts to your values
we don't feel things
about stuff that we don't care about
so
slow down
into what is this emotion that i'm
feeling
and what is the emotion telling me about
my values because we can find out about
our values in many different ways but
one of the first ways we found out about
our values
is to recognize that our emotions
are often telling us what our values are
if we just breathe into it and start
saying
what is it that this difficult emotion
might be telling me
it might be i need more support right
now it might be that i'm exhausted and i
need more self-care
but these are really important parts of
starting to connect with our values
what is up my friend you and i are
living in a golden era of
self-improvement we have books platforms
like youtube courses seminars virtual
events workshops the list really is
endless the internet has been so good
for people like you and me who want to
accomplish greater and greater things in
life and now my friend it is about to
get even better i've been spending most
of this year working on the single most
entertaining tool that you're ever going
to have around self-improvement and it
is called project kaizen it's a web 3
based game experience that will be
unlike anything else you've ever engaged
with in your life partly because the
technology is new and it's amazing if
you're not familiar with blockchain nfts
and all of that kaizen is going to be
the perfect introduction for you as it
is an excellent intersection of
entertainment and learning all backed by
the blockchain we're getting closer and
closer to launching this project for you
every single day we are working our
faces to the bone to get this thing out
there and my friend i want you to
experience it so click the link on your
screen and head on over to my discord
channel to stay up to date and be one of
the first to join me inside of project
kaizen which by the way gets its name
from the japanese term of never ending
improvement all right back to today's
episode when you had your clinical
practice did you find that people
there was a question you could ask them
that would help them figure out how to
translate that because
i've met a lot of people who they can
identify i feel bored but they have a
hard time going and this translates into
i have a value around this like are
there simple questions and things that
people can ask them or do you have them
journal
well so most of the work that i actually
do is with leaders in organizational
context and um there are a couple of
questions the first is what is the
emotion and what is the emotion telling
you you might care about and i want to
come back to that because
often the emotion we say we feel isn't
the emotion we're really feeling and how
do people get to that ultimate truth
thing we can start saying what is it
that i did today that was worthwhile
okay not what did i enjoy
because you can go to a party and you
can get drunk and you can enjoy it it's
not the same as
worthwhile what did i do today that was
worthwhile
often when we answer the question
you start connecting with
it was learning or it was connection or
it was i had that really difficult
conversation with that person
but i felt that
there was a sense of both of us being
together at the end of it and so asking
ourselves over a couple of days you know
what is this emotion that i'm feeling
what is it signaling
what did i do today that was worthwhile
um what
if i was to choose a day
that
i was designing for myself what would be
some of the things that i would do and
it might be things that are around
creativity
you know the stuff that we close
ourselves off from but that starts
signaling our values i've also got a
quiz that a lot of people use that have
got a whole lot of values kind of mapped
out in it that i can share with you but
they're different ways of starting to
explore what our values are and
this is really important because
the world around us
is constantly telling us what our values
should be
it might be to drive a particular car or
to have a particular kind of career
and so being able to connect with the
heartbeat of our own why
who we want to be
our internal compass
is really important not just because it
feels good
but it also protects us from this kind
of social contagion where we know we can
start almost living someone else's life
and then you turn around 20 years later
and you're like oh my god like i've
built this thing
but i don't want it
so values help to protect us from social
contagion but we also know that they are
incredibly important for our mental
health and well-being and knowing who
you are and what you stand for is also
protective of um burnout
and
we got to talk about that quiz then
because you you've pointed out something
that is a terrifying statistic which is
that depression now causes more absence
or um oh god i forget the exact phrase
but more than cancer time away from work
oh god wha what was the exact step
so you know the world health
organization
really points to this statistic which is
now widely accepted which is that
depression
is now the leading cause of disability
globally
that's crazy
ultraman cancer outstripping heart
disease
and so you know really we are coming
into an age it's an age where there is
incredible complexity where
technology has really outstripped our
capacity psychologically
to thrive
and so more and more these skills of
being able to be with oneself in ways
that are healthy
in ways that are emotionally agile these
are fundamental skills for ourselves our
families our children you know because
what happens is
if you think about in organizations all
organizations say oh we've got to be
agile we've got to be creative we've got
to be innovative
but in reality when people are faced
with huge amounts of information and
complexity they tend to do the opposite
they shut down there's black and white
thinking there's huge amounts of
rigidity
and emotional agility is
the skill that is critical because you
don't get
agility and flexibility in innovation
without
opening yourself up to difficult
emotions that might come with
innovation you know the flip side of
that is the innovation doesn't work
or success the flip side of that is
failure
so
you know there is a fragility that is
interwoven
in life
we are healthy until we are not we are
successful in our work until we are not
and so
these skills that i'm talking about are
the skills that help us to deal with the
world as it is not as we wish it to be
in some pollyanna reality you know or in
pollyanna fiction of just be positive
and this
singular dimension of success it's about
being able to be healthy with ourselves
what are some specifics from the quiz
because i i want like i'm so intrigued
by how you help people map their value
system um i'd love to know and i'm sure
we can link to it as well so people can
really get into it but at like just a
quick sort of nutshell version what is a
quiz walking people through sure so what
the quiz basically does is it takes
people through questions around whether
they push their emotions aside whether
they're agile with their emotions
what some of their core values are and
some of the skills that can be developed
so let me give you a practical example
of how we can be with our emotions more
effectively and how they can start
signaling our values
imagine you come home from work and
someone says to you how was your day
and
what do we often do we often use these
very big labels to describe how we're
feeling so i'm stressed is the most
common one i hear
um i'm stressed you know every day it's
like just a bit stressful
but there's a world of difference
between stress and disappointment
or stress and that like knowing feeling
of
i'm in the wrong job or the wrong career
so what i found in my work is that when
we do something that's actually fairly
simple which is to move beyond this big
label of unstressed
and instead we go into
one or two other emotions that we might
be feeling
um this psychologically is called
emotion granularity it's becoming more
granular with our difficult emotions
it's an incredible experience to do this
so you go from i'm stressed into
i'm disappointed or
i'm exhausted
and what we know psychologically is when
we label our emotions in a more granular
way
it immediately helps us to identify what
the cause of the emotion is
and helps us to start taking active
steps
so i'm stressed
i'm feeling
like i need more support here you know i
feel unsupported might be really what's
going on
and that starts to put you in the place
of how can i get more support
or
you know moving away from i'm stressed
into
actually i think i'm in the wrong job
or what it starts to do is it starts to
develop out what is called the readiness
potential in our brains it's this part
of our brains
it starts moving us from the space of
being in our heads into being in action
in our bodies
and so you start getting your resume
together you start getting your cv
together we know that this emotion
granularity is critical to our
well-being in fact children
aged two three four years old who are
more able to accurately label their
emotions
their longitudinal studies showing that
over time those children land up doing
better because you can imagine a 16 year
old who can't label his or her emotions
and someone says oh i've got a great
idea let's go let the air out of the
school principal's tires
okay
and that kid wants to be part of the
group
so a child who is more able to
accurately label their emotions is a
child who says
i want to be part of the group but i
have a sense of disquiet about what's
going on here
you know maybe this isn't the right
action
so we know that just the simple
way of being which is to move beyond big
emotions
and to be more granular with them is
extraordinarily powerful
in fact i had a client who i was working
with in an organization who always used
to say
um everyone's angry you know he was
angry his wife was angry his team was
angry with him
and we started working on this you know
what are two other options what are two
other things that the team might be
feeling
that are not about anger it's about
something else
and he started to say
maybe it's that they don't trust me yet
or maybe what's going on
is that they feel
a bit overwhelmed here
and you can see that when you go into a
meeting with other teams angry
versus
they need more trust
it's a completely different conversation
it's a completely different way of being
and months later this guy's wife said to
me that it completely changed their
relationship because he would say oh oh
it looks like you angry with me and she
was like
i'm not angry i'm just tired
oh you know i'm not angry i i just want
to be seen more
and so labeling emotions can completely
shift things there are other practical
strategies i can give as well but tell
me if you feel that
i would love to go into more but first i
want to talk about that idea of the
emotional granularity i think that's
hugely important and once you have the
language for something all of a sudden
you do start to begin to differentiate
between things and i'll say one of the
biggest breakthroughs in my own marriage
is very similar to what you were just
talking about which was the ability to
articulate in the moment what i'm
feeling and maybe even more importantly
why i'm feeling it and so my wife and i
say don't argue about the t right we
were always at the surface level about
what the argument was and once we
realized okay wait a second like when
you can get into that granularity of
this is actually unease it's not anger
or this is you're triggering my
insecurity and now let me why am i
feeling insecure about this is it's
surprising even to me and you know then
you begin to sort of dig under that and
find it but if you don't have the words
for it if you don't know
what sort of that array of options is to
be able to choose the one that fits just
right
you stay in that you know to every
problem to a hammer every problem is a
nail scenario yes yes and this is where
even starting to connect with um what it
feels like in our body because
again we so often live our lives you
know here in our heads
and when we live our lives in our heads
you know really our wisdom and our
compassion and our courage and our being
our authenticity like all of the things
that make us
thriving human beings are often not the
things in our heads you know our minds
will walk us off a cliff our minds will
you know our minds will persuade us that
we are right and another person is wrong
even if it means destroying a
relationship you know even if it means
not speaking to a person because i'm
right and they are wrong and i can't
remember exactly what this person did
all i know is i haven't spoken to them
since our minds will walk us off a cliff
and
really as human beings being effective
is often about moving away from our
heads into our hearts
okay i've heard you say that before i'm
gonna pin you down on that one so what
is it what does that mean like to be in
my head i understand to be in my heart
what it means is being in our ability to
breathe
to be centered in ourselves and are you
talking about the victor frankel space
that i've heard you mentioned before can
you say to breathe
yeah it is that i mean you know what is
victor frankel who survived the nazi
death camps describes this idea between
stimulus and response there is a space
and in that space is our power to choose
and it's in that choice that lies our
growth and our freedom
when we are hooked when we are
emotionally inagile there's no space
between stimulus and response you know
he started in on the finances i left the
room um i'm being undermined i'm gonna
shut down okay so there's no space
between stimulus and response
what are we doing to create the space
what we need to be doing is firstly do
away with this idea that some emotions
are loud some are not allowed i feel
what i feel gentle acceptance
secondly recognize that our emotions are
data
but they are not directives okay
so we want to be able to observe our
emotions
not
get
stuck in them but also not push them
aside we want to be able to observe them
wisely another way that we can start
just
generating that data not directives
space between stimulus and response
is to simply notice our thoughts our
feelings and our stories
for what they are
they are thoughts their feelings their
stories what do i mean by this if we can
instead of saying i am sad
we start to say
i'm noticing that i'm feeling sad
i'm noticing
this is my
there's no point
thought
i'm noticing that this is my i'm not
good enough story
what you're starting to do is you're
starting to notice your thoughts your
emotions and your stories
for what they are
their thoughts their emotions their
stories they're not facts
they're not
scripts that you have to live into so
when people begin to notice that when
they recognize their story do you teach
them to rewrite that story
well what we often wanted to do is we
wanted to say this is my story
and
who do i want to be
right now so you know for example this
idea of getting hooked on the story of i
am right
we've all had that experience okay human
beings love being right so i'm right and
they are wrong and we've we all know
this you know we all know that when
you've been in a relationship for any
period of time
you can have a fight with someone
and finally the water's calm
and you get into bed and you turn out
the light
and then something compels you
one last time to turn on the light again
and tell the person why you are right
and they are wrong and all hull breaks
loose again
you know wars
are made and countries are devastated by
people being hooked on the idea of being
right
and so
think about this you know the more
important question for all of us is
i may be right
but is this story serving me
you know i may be right
but is the serving who i want to be in
my relationship why do you think it's
important to move towards things that
scare you
because on the other side of that is
your growth
another side of that is strength even
in going through pain like i look at
pain as a positive thing i'm not talking
about putting yourself through pain on
purpose but it's just like working out
you know the only way you're going to
get strength in your life is if you go
through that hard moment that tough
moment i wouldn't have a story if it
wasn't for the sucky times in my life i
wouldn't have a story if it wasn't for
me going through my depressed moments so
realize this just because it's a chapter
it doesn't mean it's your whole story so
for me i just understand that it's very
important to embrace pain to go through
it because i believe the foundation of
all strength is pain
all right so speaking of chapters i
think that one of the most interesting
thing that anybody can put themselves
through is becoming a professional
athlete yeah um and i get that it sort
of wrapped up but you talk a lot in the
book about a champion's mindset yeah
how did you get to the point where you
could push yourself as hard as you did
to get into the nfl i mean that's that's
really extraordinary you have a stat
what's the stat about the number of
people that actually get into the nfl
it's less than one percent it's like
point zero zero zero point it's crazy
yes and i told my son the other day he's
like i'm gonna make it to nfl i was like
you better be working hard at 99 percent
of the people in the world you know it's
very very hard and for me
it was all i ever wanted it new it was
like no other option for me so
that's the powerful thing about tunnel
vision
is that when you really focus on
something you really want it it's very
possible but the thing is a lot of
people
aren't willing to go through the hard
times putting the work when nobody's
looking i think i tell my son all the
time i'm like okay you went to track
practice but guess what this is
something everybody does what are you
going to do
that
your teammates aren't doing because you
don't have to just be the best on your
team you got to be the best in your city
the best in your state one of the best
in the world to be able to make it so
it's a whole different level of
commitment and that's where that
championship mindset it came to me from
i want to talk about that so i don't
know how much you know about will smith
but watching him from afar has been
really really intriguing and he talked
about on when they were doing the karate
kid with his son yeah and his son got
hurt like he injured his knee and will
was like [__] on him he's like you
got to get back out there like you got
to push and jaden's response and he was
way young
like kind of slack but he was like i
want mom and like goes over with his mom
and people like will why are you pushing
him so hard he said i'm teaching my son
how to hunt
yeah and i thought that gives me the
chills now like i thought that [__] was
really powerful how do you think about
that with your son do you do you worry
about pushing too hard you were about
not pushing enough like what does that
relationship look like
so
with tristan
i push him but i want him to want it i
don't want him to want it because daddy
wants it for him because to me that's
great but if i got to push you to do
something i'm there to support you but
if i got to push you to do it it means
you really don't want to do it so this
whole process of he's 10 years old and
people thought like you know you see
kids playing at five and six and their
dad is like
you know going super hard on their kids
and i get it but at the end of the day i
want him to want sports i want him to
want football like you want to be a
doctor that's fine with me but you got
to understand the same mindset to be
successful you can take that in any
field so you're going to play sports for
the simple fact that i know this can
build you up for whatever you want to do
it teaches you perseverance it teaches
you
how to handle pressure moments it
teaches you how to work hard the ethics
of like sports is great but at the end
of the day i'm like tristan
i can want you to be a superstar but
when you really want it like when it's
like when you want to when you wake up
at 6 a.m without me waking you up when
you say hey i want to go work on routes
without me telling you
that's when you'll be obese and that's
when you'll be super successful at it
when did you start wanting success in
football that badly
when i was six wow man would you drove
that
probably want to be better than my two
older brothers but what really helped me
was
blessed enough i was able to live across
the street from a professional football
player and
it made it very tangible for me seeing
like because you know you're growing up
you see these sport your heroes as like
you know you think they're
not human and so i was able to humanize
like the dream at that moment in my life
i'm like oh this dude is just working
hard he's running around the block just
like other people and i got around that
my uncle he still coaches for the
chargers but he was coaching even back
then when i was a little kid so i was
blessed enough to be around it i got to
see jerry rice i got to see t.o and so
it made it real for me so i'm like if
they can do it they breathe just like i
breathe
you know they just work hard and they
just want it and so at that moment i
realized that it's super possible but i
knew i had to put in the work to
actually make it a reality for me dude i
love that i wish i had encountered that
when i was young the bad news is i don't
know that it would have resonated with
me when i was a kid yeah
i was not prepared to push myself
physically to get good at something when
i was young it was always about the
easiest path for me and i think about
this a lot with people in my community
and i know you'll get this because you
have such a thriving community yeah but
the one thing i come back to all the
time is i can't want it for you that's
right and so the thing that haunts my
dreams is how do you help people create
desire
and should you what do you think about
that like so there's the whole buddhist
phrase that all of suffering is born of
desire which i actually think is true
and yet i think some of the greatest
joys are born of desire and so my thing
is i've gone all the [__] way in on
desire like building desire to want
something to need it even though
objectively it like there's really
nothing to it
how do you think about want and desire
well
the leverage that i use with my
supporters is i mean at the end of the
day people say trent you changed my life
and i'm totally against that like i'm
like i didn't change your life i'm not a
life changer i just plant seeds like you
had to make the decision to actually
apply
and actually do it but i use the
leverage question of
when you get to your last day on earth
when you're sick are you going to look
back and realize that you wasted your
whole entire life settling for less
not being who you're created to be
and even with myself like i don't want
to look back on life like that i don't
want to go to my grave within completion
so i talk to him like that some of you
are going to go to your grave site when
in completion i don't know who said this
quote but they said uh you know the
richest place on the world is in the
graveyard and it's true because there's
so many dreams talents and visions in
there that people for whatever reason
fear you know just life they never
unwrap those gifts and when i talk to
them about that i used to actually this
might seem weird but i used to actually
go
to the cemetery
really
yep and i would bring one of my friends
with me and um i would say bro we walked
around there it's like this is reality
like we're gonna be here and we walked
around and we looked at the tombstones
and like death has no
you know has no age there were people
that were three
people that were 80. and it's like i'm
gonna be here one day and when i'm here
i want to have a fulfilled life i don't
want people to talk about me at a
funeral and make up stuff
i wanted to be like
trent really served this world and he
really used his life not just for
himself but to impact other people and
so i'm just i know i go back to leverage
but i'm big on that and that like flips
the switch for me like
time is ticking and so you either can
waste your day or you can do something
with it
one of the chapters in your book if i'm
not mistaken it was the last chapter is
about legacy yeah how do you think about
legacy i like personally i don't think a
lot about legacy i think a lot about
phases of our lives so i i fully
resonate with what you're saying about
walking around the graveyard which i
would [__] love to do you someday
that would be real
um
but how do you conceptualize that
do you have markers in your head about
what you're striving towards like how
deep do you go in sort of the like we're
all headed to the grave yeah i don't i
don't get to
the particular parts of it like you know
like how my funeral's gonna be set up
that creeps me out
so i don't get that end up but i do
think about like the question that i ask
myself and it's come up a lot more to me
you know and i haven't figured out why
but i asked myself you know like what
really matters
and there's a quote by bob goff and i'm
probably not gonna get this right but he
said basically like
his biggest fear was
like being successful at the wrong
things
and the quote is like way more beautiful
than that but i'm paraphrasing it's like
i used to have a fear of not succeeding
but my fear now is succeeding at the
wrong things
and i think about that a lot like what's
really going to matter at the end of my
life and i literally prioritize my life
around that i heard you say something
once you want to talk about i'm going to
butcher one of your just insanely
eloquent and beautiful quotes but you
said uh you're not a success
unless you're a success to your family
yeah and i thought that was really
interesting something because i don't
have kids i don't spend a lot of time
about but i do think a lot about what my
wife thinks of me like that's a far more
powerful motivator to me and then you
talked about how
basically how do you feel about yourself
and if you don't feel good about
yourself then you've got some
fundamental flaw that you need to
address
how do you help people begin to take
stock of where they're at with
themselves reality
so i have a rehab process and the first
r is reality it's facing reality too
many people run from it you know my
quota is you'll never win your war by
running from your battles and so you got
to step up and you got to face it i
don't care what it is
it might be something in your past it
might suck to face it for me it was
facing that my
dream was over my identity so for
somebody watching this it might be a
relationship it might be a job but i
kept running and the thing about it like
you can run all you want but reality is
going to be right there when you stop
and it's going to chase you or even if
it doesn't chase you're going to be
right there you have to face it so i
really let people know that
acknowledgement is power people think if
i acknow knowledge that i'm hurt or i
need help
i need help is the most powerful thing
that you can say
and i realize that with my life because
immediately you have people that are
going to help you and grow your life
exposing yourself like in a positive way
obviously but expose yourself we think
that we always have to be so sheltered
that we have to be so strong especially
with the social media world it's like i
have to have everything together that's
like a silent depression that's gonna
happen when you suppress things like
that when you smile for the camera but
die behind the scenes which i did so
well for so long in my life you're never
gonna fool the person that you see in
the mirror every single day so i got
really comfortable with saying
i suck at this i need help and literally
in my business life and my personal life
in the last year it's been the greatest
year of my life just by asking for help
and exposing my weaknesses in certain
areas
yeah it's interesting your obsession
with authenticity with being really who
you are at all times i think is is
really cool to see you
um get the kind of community that you've
gotten around that being vulnerable and
opening yourself up
but what i find really interesting is
you're also the flip side of the coin so
as you were talking i was like he's
absolutely right but the reason that i'm
willing to listen to you about it is
because you're also driven you're trying
to improve yourself you are trying to be
great you are trying to be strong and
tough you're just not afraid
yeah like how do you do both
i just i'm i'm real with myself and i'm
honest like we're humans i mean
everybody isn't on all the time you know
we all have our struggles our silent
battles as i like to call them and
instead of ignoring those silent vows i
let them out but yes i am a person
that's will tell you make the world
respect your greatness i'm very firm on
that i'm a person that believes in
myself i'm a person that wants you
because i believe that's contagious like
even with social media i feel like
that's what really grew my platform is
people looked at my life not because of
my knowledge or whatever it's like trent
really believes this like he really does
he really lives it he really he doesn't
just talk it or type it he lives and
that's a big thing for me you know i can
tell people a secret right be
transparent like in a real way because
that creates connection now it's like i
can relate to that person you know
growing up in the church i'm gonna be
real with you tom like i would watch
pastors and preachers and i would be
like
i could never be them because it was
always perfection i was like i could
never beat them so i just chose a
different lifestyle but now when i see
people like say you know what i struggle
with this i struggle with addiction
doesn't mean you're not awesome because
you have addictions everybody has
addictions everybody has about battles
some people just hot there is better so
i relate more to that because now it
becomes attainable now you become
relatable to me and i can be like wow
like i can still go through this there's
nothing wrong with me i'm a human i'm
going to have my insecurities my flaws
and i can actually grow from it so i
think we need more examples of the world
of that and that's what i just try to
give people as much as i can you have a
great way of like packaging things up in
these really memorable
phrases one that you said earlier that i
want to get back to is you said a lot of
people never unwrap their gift yeah and
that really hit me what is that
look like like how does one unwrap their
gift yeah it's it's a process it's the
process of i think facing fear i mean
and we can talk about fear for like
because
facing fear is is super important we can
talk about like my process with that i
think in order to unwrap your gift so
i'm not gonna go into my skylife story
that'll take forever
but i realize like what fear is right
and for me
fear is creating a known result right
from a situation we haven't experienced
yet and so when i used to go back to
football when i would be scared to go
out there and perform i'll be like you
know what i'm gonna drop the ball
i'm gonna miss the pass and the whole
crowd of 80 000 people is gonna be like
ah
so i'm like i'm scared now stage when
i'm on stage before i was speaking what
do you think i was thinking i'm gonna
freeze up again nobody's gonna care all
of these things i realized that i was
creating a result before i ever
experienced it and so i said hmm
if that's the case
i need to create something better on the
other side of that door something more
empowering that's gonna force me to
actually go through the door so now when
i speak i say you know what i'm going to
impact at least one life so go out there
and do it you know when it comes to my
skydiving of course that thing was
the parachute's not going to open you're
going to die of course you're not going
to jump out of playing but i immediately
changed that so this is going to be the
most incredible thing and also leverage
where now i can use this in every area
of my life because i conquered my
biggest
fear so
people out there that are going through
fear for moments it's kind of like this
you will never step into the ring
if you're already telling yourself that
you're going to lose before the fight
you'll never do that like why would you
right so tell yourself you're going to
win even if you get knocked down guess
what
you're never knocked out in life until
you actually tap out into your last day
so
figure out that leverage point with your
fear what's going to help you walk
through the door
and then you have to just give it to the
world i never knew speaking was my gift
until i actually went out there and
failed i actually went out there and
embarrassed myself and i realized like
wow
this is what i was created to do and i
knew that because
i like to put it like this
and i hope they get it that's watching
this but i've never had so much like
peace
in the midst of like fear never had so
much confidence in the midst of like my
weakness in that moment
and so
when it comes to gifts think about it
like this like when someone gives you a
physical gift like christmas and your
birthday what do you do
you unwrap it you show it to the world
you put on instagram
you got that same gift inside you that
the world needs and you're doing the
world of disservice
by leaving your gift wrapped up somebody
needs your story my mom told me this and
i'll never forget he said trent
you're a sign to reach people i don't
know how many but you're assigned to
reach people that nobody else can reach
but you
she said everybody has that
and the more you leave your gift wrapped
those people that need your message that
need your encouragement whatever it is
that needs your talent
they're never going to get it
and you're not going to leave this world
a better place
i know people watching right now are
thinking one question what is my gift
yeah i want to unwrap it all day long
yeah how do people identify what their
gift is enough to be able to unwrap it
this is a this is a good question this
is deep
so can we talk about purpose for a
minute and go into this so
this is my way of purpose and i've never
heard nobody talk about this and some
people might be like that's not right
but everybody tells you to find your
purpose right
and i'm just like where
like who has your purpose like the world
doubt the world has your purpose the
world might have your validation of who
you are they might be like oh you're
great at this and so they give you that
validation
talk about this in the book
i believe and i realized this like last
year and i actually wrote this chapter i
went back and i changed it all because
i'm like i'm telling to people telling
people to search for purpose i believe
you are a purpose
i believe you our purpose you're created
for a purpose like we notice that this
is like a zero percent chance of you
being you
you are that so when you operate from
there it gives you that confidence that
i am that it's not something i search
for you can take your life wherever you
want to take it what you're looking for
is placement
right it's like so for me rehab time is
not my purpose it's my placement
interesting i can take
trent to
down the street and go impact lives
because i am purpose right football if
my mom was right back then i could use
that platform to be who i am so you can
take your life anywhere and i want
people to know that because some people
think when you lose a dream or you lose
something that it's over
but you didn't lose who you are you lost
that thing that placement right you so
that's what i think about purpose and
i would tell people like understand what
your magnet is and when it comes to that
ask people and so when i look back over
my life
ever since i was five years old people
have been telling me i had this gift
but i was so focused on what i wanted to
do that i couldn't even hear that
yeah that's really interesting to me the
notion of
the difference between what you want and
where you thrive that's definitely using
my words not yours but yeah
that whole dynamic is interesting
another thing that you've said that i'm
really drawn to is
i you were talking at one point and you
said hey if you've got like a garbage
party your personality don't pretend
that it's not there don't pretend it
doesn't need to be improved like address
that make the change yeah and that like
it's that realism of you've got like the
the painting the picture of the dream
and the gift and you are purpose and all
that but also recognize that you have
these really dysfunctional parts of your
personality um how can people address a
dysfunctional part of their personality
yeah i think you have to you just have
to face it and deal with it like i think
it's just too hard to suppress it it's
too hard to ignore it and so you have to
be honest with yourself and truthful
with yourself and i think a lot of times
what it is is for me
i was expecting things from people that
i wasn't giving to people and so that's
very very selfish you know so i had to
look at myself and say you know what
this part of my personality
needs to be changed it needs to be fixed
so it's that reality that you have to
have with yourself and that that
truthfulness and
not knowing that
it doesn't make you weak by admitting
these things it doesn't make you less by
admitting these things and i bring it
back to social media because just this
generation
it's the filter life you know like even
in real life like everybody wants to put
up this filter and they think that's
their superpower but your superpower is
literally just being real
and that's where you grow at like you
have to acknowledge that i need help in
this area i have faults i have flaws
right here
let me fix these things and that's going
to make you more of a a superhuman
you just mentioned suppression you've
talked about how suppression leads to
depression yeah talk to me about that
why does that happen and why does it
matter
it matters a lot um
you know just even
for me even to get to that point of
understanding that you know my colleague
one of my best friends committed suicide
and that changed my life like when we
talk about going to the graveyard it was
right around right after that time when
i started thinking about life and what's
going on
and
i realized that
he
was suppressing so many things he didn't
have an outlet and i mean we take from a
physical standpoint i mean if you keep
suppressing something what's going to
happen it's going to explode at one
point and so what you don't face
are things that you know you don't fix
and so for me it's about letting it out
you know a lot of my videos people don't
realize like therapy
is not a weakness especially as for men
like go to therapy have somebody you can
talk to have a brotherhood a manhood
have somebody you can same thing with
women you got to have your click of
people where you can have open dialogue
without being judged to be able to let
these emotions out because those if you
don't deal with your pain your pain will
definitely deal with you it will and
i've been there before i've been like i
said the person that would say i'm okay
when i'm not okay when i was sitting in
my mom's room my mom would say trin are
you good yeah i'm good when i wasn't
good at all and i got to those moments
where
i don't know if it was suicidal thoughts
but i didn't care about living if
something happened to me might be better
off because my life is over that's the
way i felt and so i had to let those
things out and my way at that time was
music
with your mindset how are you dealing
with your mom's cancer yeah it's hard
it's very hard my mom
had cancer and what made it hard was she
beat stage for living in breasts and i'm
with her at the at her last treatment
she rings the bell she's like trent
i don't feel and it's on my instagram
like she's where she runs the bench this
trend i don't feel something don't feel
right i'm like mommy you're all right
you just in your mind
she goes to the doctor that next maybe
two days later and they find out after
tests that she has brain cancer
so at that moment i'm like
it's not fair
you know and i started questioning my
faith
and i had to do like a deep search and a
deep dive of
you know understanding and finding a
perspective my perspective was my prison
at that point
and what
what really helped my perspective and
i wish it wouldn't have helped but it
did um my best friend's mother died
in her sleep
didn't have anything
and so i told my mom i was like mom
as much as this sucks you're still here
you having to go through treatments
means you're still alive that pain means
you're still alive
and
that's the perspective that i'm taking
with it now like there's people who wish
they could have this pain there's people
who wish they could
you know be alive to even feel cancer
and she's progressing with it though and
uh it's hard man i tell people all the
time i don't know the exact words to
even tell people how to how i'm dealing
with it you know i'm just trying my best
to be strong for her and
try to see the beauty in it
wow that's interesting i did not expect
you to say that how do you see the
beauty in cancer in anything like that
well
it's for me seeing that
she still has an opportunity
to overcome it
and i think you know
is that is that power perspective in
that and saying you know what
her life might not be how she wants it
to be
but at least she has life and that's how
i look at my life at times and everybody
should look at their life yeah life
might not be adding up to what you
wanted to add up to but at least you
have another every single day is a new
beginning every day is a new beginning
and
certain days aren't going to look like
you want them to look but
at least you have another chance like a
hundred i tell us that all the time 150
000 people die every day that's 55
million people a year
if you're looking for a blessing
put your hand over your heart realize
that's your blessing you have another
opportunity at life and that's why i'm
so intrigued this is like geeky probably
but i'm so intrigued with sunrises and
sunsets a sunrise
lets me know that i have another day and
the sunset means i made it through
another day
and so i'm i love sunrises and sunsets
and i thank god for it
it's really interesting you just hit me
with that because today in particular
the i had so much to do
self-created i don't ever have to work
again if i don't want to
but i had so much that i had allowed to
be on my plate that the sunrise was
almost frustrating for me because it
meant that time was going by and i just
wanted it to stay dark and i wanted to
have more time to work and get something
done as you were saying i was like [__]
now that's a really powerful perspective
shift to like one simple
difference of framing of like you know
wow i'm here i have
the
opportunity to have a lot of my plate
and to dig through it that's uh just and
it was a point like that's funny you
said a lot a lot on your plate i don't
know where rapper is i think it's lil
wayne i think he says like a lot of my
plate is now my favorite dish she said
that and i think it's a genius line
because i'm like that is like
that is true because there are times
like because i went i go through these
moments like i'm flying everywhere and
i'm just like gosh i gotta fly here like
my book is like this is crazy and i i
caught myself i'm like bro
like do you realize the life that you
have right now
there will be times like you dreamed of
this
you know even of course i thought it
would be football but like you dreamed
of this
you didn't have nothing on your plate
and you were you would pray to have
anything on it so don't get you know of
course what i don't want to overwhelm
myself with stuff but don't complain
when you have too much on your plate
because there's people that have nothing
on it and so that those are the
perspective shifts that i use like a lot
every single day every time i'm
complaining i go to that like you're
blessed to be able to be in this
position
like you wanted this this was your dream
you know so for sure we are going to be
talking all about overcoming negativity
this is something that i know a lot of
people struggle with and it really is
going to be the kind of thing that holds
you back but i've got some really
powerful tips techniques strategies that
are going to help you guys get past that
and build the life that you want for
yourself now i get asked about this a
lot so i've had a lot of questions come
in and the first one goes like this how
do you learn to love forgive yourself
when you've done something in the past
you wouldn't forgive someone else for
doing i want to do and be better but
seem to always come back because i don't
think i deserve the things i want to
achieve
youch okay so here we go
i have a very hard and fast rule that i
use when it comes to this idea of
self-punishment now self-punishment can
be very useful but not when it gets to
the point where it is diminishing your
sense of self like what i see here when
you can't even let yourself believe that
you are worthy of improving getting
better and accomplishing things we're
now officially in what i'll call a death
spiral so the rule that i put in my life
is very simple and it allowed me to let
myself off the hook for things that i
had done in the past and it goes like
this
every human being
should only ever
do
and believe
that which moves them towards their goal
now their goals should be both exciting
and honorable
meaning it should be exciting for you
but it should also not just serve you
but it should also serve other people so
no matter who you are no matter what
you've done
pursuing a goal that is honorable that
uplifts other people
why on earth would you not want yourself
to do that so if we can agree that
everybody should be pursuing
goals that are honorable and everybody
should only allow themselves to do and
believe
the things that propel them
down that path to actually achieving
that goal now it's not about you it's
just about common sense
for human society
for us as the human animal to get the
most out of this experience and to
contribute the most
then we have to put ourselves in a frame
of mind
that propels us down that path
there were so many times in my life
where
i
really believed that i was stupid or i
believed that i was unworthy or i
believed i needed to be punished for
something that i had done
and i would get in these loops of like
oh man i'm not good enough i'm never
going to achieve this and why am i even
bothering and
i realized that even though i would
ultimately get past it and be like look
just do it i would waste so much time
in this beating myself up cycle so i
created that rule that i was only going
to do and believe that which moved me
towards my goals so now it's like am i
good enough to do this am i worthy
enough to do this do i deserve to have
something positive happen in my life and
the answer is i'm going to believe that
yes i am good enough to pull this off
yes i am worthy of doing something like
this for two reasons one i'm only
pursuing things that are honorable in
the first place and two
such is the nature of the human animal
and the human experience that we should
all be getting ourselves in a mental
frame of reference that propels us
forward and so i just let myself off the
hook that even if
i deserve to be punished it wasn't gonna
move me towards my goal it wasn't going
to help me contribute to myself which by
the way nobody should feel bad about
contributing to themselves but it really
wasn't going to help me contribute to
other people
and as long as i felt good about the
things that i was trying to do and
create it just made sense to let myself
off the hook so that i could take the
actions that i needed to take in order
to
help in order to contribute in order to
thrive
so i use that rule all the time in my
life and i hope that you will get as
much value out of it as i have
all right the next question around
overcoming negativity
even though i have had lots of learnings
from my previous relationships certain
toxic ones have given me experiences
that override my logic and optimism and
affect my current situation how do i use
the past as a source of knowledge and
use it to my advantage in this case
rather than see my current relationship
crumble because of my assumptions to all
the negative things that can happen lack
of trust etc okay
this all comes down to what is effective
so
if
thinking about all those negative things
is effective then we're going to do it
if letting those negative things go and
looking at the more optimistic side of
what could become what we could build
works then we're going to
ignore it we're going to move forward
now the reality is both of those things
are true you want to look at where
things went wrong you want to assess
what the problem was that caused for
that mistake to happen in the first
place for the betrayal or whatever may
have occurred
now the key is when you look at this and
say ah there are bad people in the world
there are people that want to do me harm
then you've taken a neutral incident
this person just to make it extreme this
person betrayed me
okay as shakespeare says there's nothing
either good or bad but thinking makes it
so you've made a value judgment on that
now one way you could say is i
uh
people are bad like as a defaults people
it is so easy to go to the negative side
to cheat on somebody to take what you
can get to take advantage of the
situation that people are looking to
lure me into a sense of um trust and
then they're going to abuse that trust
and it's just the nature of people well
the reality is that does exist in human
nature like we know that humans can be
incredibly selfish but whatever you look
for you're going to find
so i want to introduce you to this idea
of it doesn't matter what you look at
it matters what you see
and i'll push that even farther and say
it doesn't matter what you look at it
matters what you choose to see
because the other way to look at that if
somebody betrays you is to say oh my god
that really sucked that hurt i do not
want to put myself in that situation
again
but
i know how
hurt people can be how scared how
wounded how people can get
based on how they were raised and the
people that they've been around they can
get these toxic patterns where they
destroy the good things in their own
life like we had an amazing relationship
and they ended up
getting themselves into uh a situation
where they lacked integrity where they
couldn't be honest and i know what it's
like to be unable to say the hard things
i know what it's like to get swept up in
you know uh the electricity of the
beginning of a relationship or to be too
afraid to invest in something for the
long term
and so
with grace and compassion though i'm not
going to go back into that relationship
i actually understand how they could end
up there
another way to look at it and this is
the one that gets my vote
is to say
all right this sucked i get it i get
that humans do dumb things i get that
humans can be hurtful
i'm not interested though in what my
partner did wrong i'm only interested in
what i can do next time to avoid the
same mistakes without
diminishing the beauty that is a
relationship
now i have a fundamental belief that the
single greatest joy that anybody can
have in their life is to share a life
with somebody that they love and who
loves them that they trust and who trust
them
so i'm not going to give up on that
belief because it went wrong one time
two times three times whatever i'm
looking at what i can control to make
sure that i don't end up back in that
situation now all three of these ways of
looking at it are
reasonable they're rational there is a
very strong argument to be made for any
of those three right but only one of
them empowers you to move forward to
take control of your own life to make
different choices next time even if it's
just to say
you know there are issues in the way
that i select and do i need to go seek
therapy to figure out what it is that
draws me to people that are more likely
to betray me or to abuse me or whatever
the case may be but these ultimately are
identifiable problems and solvable
problems and given that they are
identifiable and solvable problems i
want to stay in the driver's seat which
means i have to take responsibility for
my actions now that doesn't mean that
i'm beating myself up and you know
playing the blame game it just means i'm
retaining control which is
extraordinarily powerful so i want to go
back to that idea of it doesn't matter
what you look at it matters what you see
i'm gonna choose to see what i could do
differently in order to get a different
result and because i believe that one of
the the i mean for me the belief is the
most beautiful thing that you can ever
hope to get in life is to love and be
loved to somebody that loves you back
that you trust and they trust you and
that takes a lot of work but it's
amazing and it's worth that effort so
i'm gonna retain control all right
that's how i would look at it
not just that particular example but
that's how i look at basically
everything in my life
all right next question
how do you know when something is
actually negative or a warning sometimes
when you embark on a journey there are
so many voices within how do i then
learn to separate negativity from fear
all right this is amazing
this is a question about self-awareness
now all of the you know self-improvement
talk in the world is useless if you
don't learn to become self-aware now
here's the great news this is a process
now there's certainly some people that
take to it a little bit more easily and
maybe you really struggle with
self-awareness but i'm going to walk you
quickly through the process of how to
gain some more self-awareness so it goes
like this in your body there's this
thing called the vagus nerve the vagus
nerve is the biggest nerve in your body
the vagus nerve
runs all over everywhere touches every
system goes into your gut down your
limbs everything
now
most people think of the body
as the brain telling your body what to
do and then a little bit of information
from the body if you hurt yourself or
whatever you're going to get a pain
signal or a pleasure signal but for the
most part it's a top down system
read
lisa feldman barrett's book how emotions
are made
that book flips
all of this on its head
and what it explains is
that
it's basically an extrapolation of the
fact that the vagus nerve 80 of the data
that it sends is from the body to the
brain only 20 from the brain to the body
think about that
and that emotions start in the body so a
big part of self-awareness is getting in
your body feeling your body figuring out
how
a an emotion manifests itself does it do
you start to get flush do you feel
jittery are you anxious are you angry
beginning to identify the sensations in
your body because the way emotions are
made you get a feeling in your body your
body then maps that feeling on to what
was happening the last time that you
felt that oh the last time you felt like
that you were angry the last time you
felt like that you were scared the last
time you felt like that you were in love
whatever and your body tries to map or
your brain tries to map that body
sensation onto a familiar state and then
once it goes ah yeah i know that this is
fear boom all the responses that come
with fear and you go and so one of the
ways that people talk about anxiety
at a physiological level
anxiety looks very similar to excitement
and so one of the loops that a cognitive
behavioral therapist for instance would
tell you to do is to go oh i know this
feeling this is excitement
not oh i know this feeling i'm super
anxious oh i know this feeling this is
excitement and you constantly work to
reframe that feeling as excitement now
the super weird thing is
it works
your brain actually believes what you
tell it so your brain is quite literally
coming up with a
backwards compatible story to try to
make sense of the feeling
but it also allows you to put a
conscious reinterpretation
on top
of that feeling
so now you're able to go
oh this isn't anxiety this is excitement
i feel
that what's coming is going to be fun
it's going to be exciting and that's why
my heart is beating faster that's why my
breath is getting more shallow because
i'm super excited to go do this thing
now when you first start doing it of
course it sounds like bs
and you're calling yourself out on it
but if you repeat it and you go through
that process enough it really does begin
to come true
the next part of the equation is just
getting really good at identifying the
signal
that your body's sending you so instead
of mapping it to sort of you know four
or five
really basic primary emotions
fear excitement
um joy
sadness whatever like those really sort
of primary colors of emotion
we get into a layer deeper and we start
beginning to identify
oh i get this is i'm feeling flustered
why am i feeling flustered oh they they
um
they're saying that i'm short and i'm
insecure about my height so oh man this
isn't me that i dislike them this is
that they're tapping into my insecurity
and i will just tell you in a marriage
like realizing that 90 of the arguments
you get into you think they're about a
cup of tea or about the kids or
um let's stick with the kids money
that's another huge one
you think you're arguing about money
let's say
but really what's happening is
you're afraid that you can't pay the
bills or you're afraid that when they
say
that they're worried that you're not
going to be able to pay the bills that
what they're saying is you don't make
enough money and that they told you you
should have gone in to talk to your boss
to ask for a raise or you should be
working harder you should have quit that
job a long time ago and gone somewhere
else and so
now you get this flustered feeling
because they're triggering an insecurity
but what usually happens is people just
lash out and you start arguing about the
paying the bill but this isn't about
paying the bill this is about how you
feel about your job and what you think
they're judging you about not having a
higher paying job people get into those
death loops all the time the biggest
argument my wife and i
ever got into
was over a cup of tea
over a cup of tea
we got into this huge screaming match
it almost ended our vacation what little
vacation we had at that time
and i remember thinking
this is crazy like we are legitimately
yelling at each other we are about to
turn the car around on the freeway and
go home and not go to our vacation
over a cup of tea
and so finally
we just said all right hold on hold on
what are we really fighting about
and that was the beginning of realizing
my body sends me a signal it's making me
agitated i blanket interpret this as oh
i'm angry why am i angry oh because they
wasted time having this cup of tea
when in reality it was this way deeper
thing about respect
and i felt like
she wasn't understanding how important
it was to me
to have taken time off to go on this
vacation to spend money we were so poor
to spend money on a hotel so i wanted to
be there the second they would let us
into that room to feel like i was
getting the most out of my money and for
her she's like oh my god i'm finally
heard and understood that we're going on
vacation he's giving me some of his time
and so i'm going to start my day out
with a cup of tea and just bask in you
know going slow and not you know being
hard charging for a minute
but we weren't understanding each other
and so we had this huge blow up over the
t so beginning to identify in real time
my body's telling me something i don't
want to shove it into this primary
basket of emotion i want to figure out
what's really going on
that some egregious percentage of the
time it's somebody's triggered an
insecurity about something you're not
feeling respected you're not feeling
loved you're not feeling smart they make
you feel dumb make you feel poor
whatever you have your insecurities
around and when you can actually talk
about those insecurities now things
begin to unlock but it begins with that
process of i feel something in my body
what is it put a name to it make it as
nuanced as possible and then articulate
it out loud when you start doing that
enough all of a sudden you're able to
get to that very quickly and that will
change the game dear tom many people
around me are struggling with negative
self-deprecating thoughts and
self-narratives and nothing i do
or say for them seems to reach them they
are so used to being miserable and
depressed all the time that they are
unconsciously blocking away the good in
life so my question is what should i do
with people who refuse to let go of
their negativity they are close friends
and family members so i just can't cut
ties with them but being with them is
really draining thank you in advance for
your brilliant answer and wish you and
your team all the best
all right
the super bummer news that i have for
you
is while i have the right answer
i don't know that it's the super genius
answer that you want
one of the goals of my life
is to get to the point where in 30
seconds or less
i can change the course of somebody's
life through
magic words for lack of a better way to
think of it
and i'm really trying
and it won't give up but as of right now
the only solution that i have when you
love somebody that is stuck in
negativity
is what i call just sit
if i know i'm going to spend time with
them
and i can't break them out of their
negative ways then i'm just going to sit
and be with them and i'm going to love
them and i'm going to make sure that
they know that i love them and
i'll live my life without judgment
without needing them to change without
trying to preach to them i'm just going
to be with them and find things that we
can talk about that's fun
there's almost always something that
even the most negative person loves and
if you can find that thing fishing
card collecting
hawaii whatever
somebody's thing is whatever it is that
they like to talk about and you get them
onto that subject you'll actually have
fun it's really surprising my my dad's
wife is way into quilting now
i can't tell you how not into quilting i
am
but she's really passionate about it
and having a conversation with her about
quilting is so interesting because she's
so passionate and whenever you can get
somebody on to something that they're
passionate about whether they're
a positive person or a negative person
it gets to be a pretty fun place so i
just sit i try to find things that
they're going to be excited to talk
about and my whole goal is to make them
feel loved where they're at now i live
my life the way i'm going to live it i
don't join them in negativity i don't
you know go in on those conversations
but i don't want them to feel judged i
don't want to put distance between us um
you know there's nothing worse than
making somebody that you love and care
about feel judged which of course i was
by even though i was just trying to help
i didn't want to see them suffer anymore
in constantly trying like saying hey
you're doing this wrong like there's a
better way you'll be happier
it just made them feel judged and it was
putting tremendous distance between me
and somebody that i cared about so
it works it will work every time but you
have to let go and know that they're
going to suffer until they're ready to
change
you can't want it for them
much to my dismay
all right
next up
i previously used negativity as fuel to
achieve my goals i.e doing things that
others didn't believe i could do
although this was a very effective tool
i ultimately felt dissatisfied when i
reached these goals i am trying now
to use passion to fuel my goals but find
that it is a less effective driving
force have i just not found something
that i'm passionate enough about or is
negativity truly a powerful tool if so
is there a way of reframing the
negativity such that i can use it
without feeling dissatisfied at the end
okay so
yes
there is the dark side
and there is the light side of the force
and the dark side has its place
but you have to be very careful you
cannot use them in equilibrium i have
found in my own life that it's about 80
20.
80 of my time i spend focused on the
beautiful things that i want to create
the amazing things the the mission that
i'm on how i want to help other people
right i talked about goals being
exciting to you
and honorable so they uplift you and
other people
and i try to spend as much time as i can
there
and that's gotten me through a lot of
difficult times to think about the
people i'm trying to serve to think
about the way that i'm going to help
people we end every team meeting at
impact theory with a connection to our
communities whether it's playing a video
of somebody who's changed their life or
reading a letter that somebody's written
us about how
the content that we create has moved
them forward in some meaningful way and
they're beautiful and it's amazing it
feels so
good
but
there are times
where i'm so fatigued
there's a great quote by vince lombardi
fatigue makes cowards of us all
and there are times where i'm so
fatigued
all the beautiful things in the world
are not enough to keep me going
and i'm just done i'm spent i'm in
i'm past the day david goggins 40 where
he says when you think you're broken and
couldn't possibly go another step you're
only 40 of the way there okay the
beautiful things that get me past that
hurdle
but when you're actually 80 of the way
there 90 of the way there really close
to being fully spent
the thing that i lean on in that moment
is the dark side
the people that want me to fail
the people that are on my list
as i call it
there are people that have tried to
trip me up
that want to see me lose
that
come at me go behind my back whatever
and i put them on a list
and i never think about the list more
than 20 of the time because that's a
dark place to be
but when i'm really
tired
and i'm in danger of
cowardice
i think about those people
and it's an ugly energy
but damn
is it powerful
to say i'm not going to let them win
i will as david goggins says take their
souls
and it's really powerful
and it's one of those things that i
often get pushed back on because it is
ugly to say that i think about these
people and i think about destroying them
and beating them and outperforming them
in every way and dunking in their face
and doing better than them in life and
watching them
just get demolished by my performance
but it's motivating
and it works
now if you spend too much time there you
slide into bitterness you slide into
anger it's resentment it's all about
them
but man let me tell you if you get that
balance right 80 20
90 10
man it's
it's really profoundly powerful there is
a reason that evolution has given you
anger
there's a reason that evolution has
given you rage there is a reason that
evolution has given you righteous
indignation
you know you hear these apocryphal
stories of
a woman lifts a car off her baby
and i think the reason that we all
believe it whether it's true or not
is you know what that energy amplitude
is like when
you're just enraged with somebody and
you refuse to back down and you're right
and they're wrong
i used to when i first started working
out in the gym and i hated every second
of it i used to imagine somebody
attacking my wife
and the rage that inspired in me allowed
me to push myself in the gym
and
i would say
the problem isn't
that it's a powerful energy the prob it
only becomes a problem when you spend
too much time there so the
the short answer to your question is
use it but never more than 20 and if you
also have that huge basket of resources
to draw on of things you love and people
you want to help and you know all the
great things that you can bring into the
world if you keep pushing
you will be fine so don't be afraid to
leverage it don't over leverage it
i love that question
all right six
last one
i currently study at a prestigious
school in my country after i finally
finished high school my problem with
negativity has to do with this school
since the day i got enrolled i'm full of
negativity and self-doubt which led me
to squandering most of the scholar year
my brain somehow finds ways to trick me
and keep me unmotivated and negative all
the time it's really depressing to be
like this and stuck in a rut if you
could help me overcome this curse of
negativity i truly appreciate it and
thanks a million for your efforts all
right
homie when i say have the silver bullet
for this one this this is the magic
genius answer that people were looking
for on the other one here it goes
you do not need to think that you are
anything special it is absolutely okay
for you to be
hopelessly
average
why
to me the most powerful thing that you
could believe about yourself is that
you're the average human now why i
actually think it is less powerful for
you to think that you are above average
because to think that you are above
average means that you are valuing
yourself for being better than people
it's a super vulnerable position to be
in because you will inevitably meet
people who are better than you and what
do you do with your ego then then it's
really crushing you thought you were the
man and now you encounter somebody
that's better than you they slap you
around they outperform you they dunk on
you whatever and now whoa like you've
got to rebuild and claw your way back
versus
saying the following
the average human is the ultimate
adaptation machine
as a species
humans have chosen
to respond to cultural and environmental
cues so we do not come pre-programmed
like a horse that comes out of the womb
10 minutes later it's ready to rock and
roll it's running around doing all the
things that a horse can do a human on
the other hand has this huge period of
development after birth where we cannot
take care of ourselves we can't walk
can't hold our own head up we [__] in
our pants it's
crazy but
what that does is it allows us to drink
in this the environment that we're born
into and adapt
so the average human is the ultimate
adaptation machine therefore being the
average human means you're a learner
that's it you're not exceptional so
you're not putting any of your
psychology your
self-worth your pride into being better
than somebody else
it all comes down to valuing yourself
for being the learner so hey cool you
wasted a bunch of time at school no
reason to hide from that it was a waste
we're not going to repeat the mistake
but we learn so you've got the
self-awareness to see that it was a
mistake now it's just like what do you
want to do what do you want to get great
at because if you apply yourself even if
you're not good yet
you can get
good
how do i know that because you're the
average human and the average human is
the ultimate adaptation machine this is
all about disciplined
focused energy
into acquiring a skill set so what i
call the only belief that matters when
you believe the time and energy directed
at something through deliberate practice
will actually make you better at that
thing
now all of a sudden it's like i can get
good at anything if i apply myself and
now all of a sudden your behaviors align
with your belief
that's why that belief matters so much
because if you don't think you can get
better at something then why would you
apply any time and energy to it and if
you don't apply time and energy to it
then you really won't get any better so
it becomes this loop of well i believe i
can get better therefore i try therefore
i actually get better therefore i try
harder and you get in this virtuous
cycle
this is hugely important
that is one of those things that will
govern the rest of your life you value
yourself for learning getting better at
something and applying yourself
everything else will take care of itself
because you just keep applying yourself
don't make excuses don't be asked
yourself if you wasted time you wasted
time don't spend your time beating
yourself up over it because we only do
and believe that which moves us towards
our goals right we talked about that
earlier so we're gonna do and believe
that which moves us towards our goal
and
in this case that is the belief that we
can get good at anything now there's an
incredible quote i love this quote so
much
you can't make a racehorse out of a pig
but you can make a really fast pig
your life can be the answer to what does
a fast pig look like that is certainly
what my life is
all the success that i've had in my life
is not because i was gifted at any one
thing when i left for college my mother
quietly assumed i was going to fail my
best friend assumed i was going to
marshmallow my way through life when i
asked my father-in-law for his blessing
to marry his daughter he said
no and yet i went on to be successful to
earn my father-in-law's respect um
not because they misidentified me
because they didn't they were right
but because i developed drive i got the
only belief that mattered and i finally
realized that
humans are meant to grow and get better
at something and i just have to apply
myself and the same is true for you
decide what you want to get good at and
go after it with everything you've got
and that my friends
is how you overcome negativity you're
dancing with these electricity and these
chemical charges that are bouncing
between each other so then the number of
brain cells becomes less relevant that's
why
i just i just think though the future
for brain science brain health is going
to be even better than what what we've
already seen but we have just started to
manipulate the mind